# Page 1
Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Mandir Trust has decided to provide funds to Queen Mary Institute, Pune, which is working for the rehabilitation of soldiers and their families who were taken hostage during the war for the defence of the country.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Law and Justice,
Government Decision No. Narikati-2019/ P.S. No.34/ K.S.16
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Ministry, Mumbai 400 032.
Date: February 25, 2019.
Reference: Letter No. 16 of the In-charge Executive Officer, Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Mandir Trust, Prabhadevi, Mumbai. Savigam/ 1582/2019, Dy. 16.02.2019
Introduction: Queen Mary Institute, Pune is the only institution working for the self-reliance and rehabilitation of the families of the soldiers who have been arrested for the defense of the country. In order to support this institution in its activities, it was decided to provide funds to the tune of Rs.25 lakhs in the meeting of Sri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Mandir Vyapana Samiti dated 15/1/2019. The Executive Officer in-charge, Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Nyas, Prabhadevi, Mumbai, through a letter under his reference, has requested the Government to approve the proposal of providing funds to the tune of Rs.25 lakh to Queen Mary Institute, Pune, as per the decision taken in the meeting.
A decision was taken at a meeting of the Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Temple Management Committee to provide Rs 25 lakh to Queen Mary Institute, Pune, for the rehabilitation of soldiers and their families who have been taken captive for the defence of the country. The Government was considering as a" special case" the proposal received from the Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Mandir Trust, Prabhadevi, Mumbai, for sanctioning an amount of Rs. 25 lakh from the Trust to Queen Mary Institute, Pune.
""" Government Decision: As a"""" special case"","" the Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Mandir Trust has approved a grant of Rs.25 lakh to Queen Mary Institute, Pune, which is engaged in the rehabilitation of the families and self-reliance of the soldiers who have been arrested for the defence of the country."""
This decision has been made available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www. maharahstra. gov. in with code 201902251704104312. This is it. This order is being issued by digital signature.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra,
Digitally signed by Salunke Sunita Parag
Salunke Sunita DN: c=IN, o=Government of Maharashtra, ou=Water Resources Department,
Parag 8cff1b4acde 7d, cn=Salunke Sunita Parag
(S. P. Salunke)
Administrative Officer, Law and Justice Department.
(1) M. Additional Chief Secretary to the Chief Minister, Maharashtra State, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 2. Minister of State, Ministry of Law and Justice, Private Secretary, Mumbai, 3rd Chairman, Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Mandir Trust, Prabhadevi, Mumbai.
Executive Officer, Shri Siddhivinayak Ganapati Temple Trust, Prabhadevi, Mumbai.
5) Selecting. 16