# Page 1
The notification has been issued for the recruitment of Notaries for Solapur (Headquarter), Barshi, Sangole, Malshiras, Madha, South Solapur and Taluka Solapur.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Law and Justice
Government Circular No.: 698-2019/ Notary/ E Branch
5th Floor (Main), Mantralaya, Mumbai-32
Date: August 02, 2019
Government circular
For appointment of Notaries under the Notaries Act, 1952 and the Notaries Rules, 1956 made thereunder in the following Talukas of Solapur District, candidates having the qualifications prescribed in Rule 3 under the Notaries Rules, 1956 may apply in the manner and in the form prescribed in Rule 4 of the said Rules. ) are being sought by the competent authority, Department of Law and Justice, Ministry of Home Affairs, Mumbai. Apart from the documents prescribed in the Notary Rules, the candidates are required to attach a certificate of domicile (domicile certificate); a certified copy of the ration card (ration card or Aadhaar card); a certificate from the president/ secretary of the Taluk Lawyers Union that the applicant is a member of that Lawyers Union; a copy of the PAN card, if there is a PAN number in respect of income tax, along with the application in the prescribed format.
A photo is also required to be submitted.
According to the circular, eligible candidates/ applicants who had earlier sent their applications to the government on their own will have to apply again. Applications submitted in advance will not be considered.
All eligible candidates are required to send their application in the prescribed format only by Registered Post/ Speed Post to the undersigned competent authorities. Also on the application form. ............................................................ Complete the application form in the office. It will be available during office hours on September 16, 2019. Applications received after this date and time will not be considered if they are not in the prescribed format, not affixed with photograph and not attached with complete documents.