# Page 1
Applications are invited for the post of Notary for Bhuma and Paranda Talukas of Osmanabad District.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Law and Justice
Government Circular No.: 697-2019/ Notary/ E Branch
5th Floor (Main), Mantralaya, Mumbai-32
Date: August 2, 2019
Government circular
For appointment of Notaries under the Notaries Act, 1952 and the Notaries Rules, 1956 made thereunder in the following Taluks of Osmanabad District, applications in the manner and in the format prescribed in Rule 4 of the said Rules are being invited from the eligible candidates under the Notaries Rules, 1956 through the competent authority, Department of Law& Justice, Ministry of Law& Justice, Mumbai. Apart from the documents prescribed in the Notary Rules, the candidates are required to enclose a certificate of domicile (domicile certificate); a certified copy of ration card (ration card or Aadhaar card) from the president/ secretary of the Taluk Bar Association, a certificate that the applicant is a member of that Bar Association; a copy of PAN card, if there is PAN number in respect of income tax, along with the application in the prescribed format. A photo is also required to be submitted.
According to the circular, eligible candidates/ applicants who had earlier sent their applications to the government on their own will have to apply again. Applications submitted in advance will not be considered.
All eligible candidates are required to send their application in the prescribed format only by Registered Post/ Speed Post to the undersigned competent authorities. Also on the application packet....... Application for the post of Notary in the Taluk should be mentioned in bold letters. Complete the application form in the office. It will be available during office hours on September 16, 2019. Applications received after this date and time will not be considered if they are not in the prescribed format, not affixed with photograph and not attached with complete documents.