# Page 1
Rules of procedure for dealing of Legislation work (Bills /Ordinances) and Subordinate Legislation work.
GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA,
Law and Judiciary Department,
Legislation Branch,
Madam cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Government Resolution No. LEG-2023/B-594
Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 032.
Dated the 6th November 2023.
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION
Background:
Administrative Departments in Mantralaya implement different Acts pertaining to that Department as per the subjects allotted to them under the Maharashtra Government Rules of Business. The Department refers Legislative Proposals to the Law and Judiciary Department for examining the legal and constitutional feasibility of the proposals and for drafting of Bills and Ordinances and scrutiny of notifications, rules, orders, etc. All the Legislative proposals and Subordinate Legislation Proposals are examined by the Legislation Branch of the Law and Judiciary Department.
2. The Legislation Branch of the Law and Judiciary Department plays vital role to achieve the policy objectives which the Government desires through Legislation and Subordinate Legislation. The Legislation Branch provides a unique interface between the Mantralaya Departments and the Maharashtra State Legislature. Every Legislative proposal undergoes various stages. The officers of Legislation Branch are required to follow certain procedure before introduction of Bill in the House and after passing of the Bill by both Houses of the Maharashtra State Legislature. The Mantralaya Department also plays important role in processing the Legislation and Subordinate Legislation and to follow certain procedure.
3. Drafting of Legislation and Subordinate Legislation requires expertise, experience, dedication in work and availability of trained and expert draftsmen. Drafting of Legislation is highly technical, complicated and lengthy process; therefore, it requires sufficient time. Any person who has a legal knowledge cannot become competent draftsman without practical experience in legislative drafting. Legislative drafting is altogether different from legal drafting.
4. Many times, the Mantralaya Departments forward proposals hastily and such proposals are vague in nature. Most of the Legislative Proposals are received in the Law and Judiciary Department few days before the beginning of the Session or during Session. In such cases, the Legislation Branch does not get sufficient time to examine the proposals in detail. It is necessary to have sufficient number of officers in the Department.
If the Legislative Proposals are not prepared in proper way, in time and by following due procedure by the Mantralaya Department, it consumes lot of time of the officers of Legislation Branch as well as the Concerned Departments. The officers in
# Page 2
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
Legislation Branch get very less time, for examining and drafting the Legislative Proposals. The officers are requires to draft maximum Bills/Ordinances in minimum time. Sometimes, it leads to litigations. Once the law is enacted, it is interpreted by the various implementing authorities, lawyers, courts, citizen, etc., therefore, the Legislative Proposals are required to be examined in detail and be drafted very carefully and for that purpose, the proposals should be referred to the Law and Judiciary Department well in advance.
5. The legislative proposals to make amendments in the existing Acts or enact a new law either by way of promulgating an Ordinance or by way of introducing a Bill in the Maharashtra State Legislature are forwarded by the Mantralaya Departments to the Law and Judiciary Department. Many times it has been noticed that, the Mantralaya Departments have no idea about the proper procedure of dealing with the Legislative Proposals and Subordinate Legislation proposals. Even the law is enacted, the concerned Departments are not taking any action to bring into force the provisions of the Act, to appoint authorities, constitutes the Boards, issue required notifications, prepare rules, frame regulations, etc., which are required for implementation of the Act. It is, therefore, considered necessary to issue detail rules of procedure for processing of Legislation proposals and Subordinate Legislation proposals for the information of concerned officers and employees of all Departments. The purpose of these rules are all officers and employees of Mantralaya Department should know the procedure and stages of Legislation, their role, duties and responsibilities in the Legislation making process and Subordinate Legislation work. By making of these rules, it will be helpful to implement the Government's policies in time bound period and manner.
Government Resolution:
To implement the Government's policies qualitatively and in time bound period and manner, the Rules of procedure for dealing of Legislation work (Bills /Ordinances) and Subordinate Legislation work, are being made as attached in Annexure hereto.
6. The said rules are on the Maharashtra Government website www.maharashtra.gov.in.
Its computer code number is 202311061448110112. The said Resolution is digitally signed.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra, SATISH BABAN
WAGHOLE
(Satish Waghole)
Secretary (Legislation) to Government, Law and Judiciary Department.
Copy to
1) Secretary to Governor, 2) Principal Secretary to Chief Minister, 3) Secretary to Deputy Chief Minister (Law and Judiciary), पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २
# Page 3
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
4) Secretary to Deputy Chief Minister (Finance), 5) Chief Secretary, Mantralaya, 6) All Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary/Secretary, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 7) Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Assembly/Council, Vidhan Bhavan, Mumbai, 8) Directorate of Publicity, Mumbai, 9) Directorate of Languages 10) All officers, Legislation Branch, Law and Judiciary Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ३
# Page 4
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३ / बी-५९४
ANNEXTURE
Law and Judiciary Department, Legislation Branch,
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 032.
Dated the 6th November 2023.
No. LEG- 2023/B-594.- In supersession of all existing Government Notifications, Resolutions, Circulars or Orders, issued in so far as it relates to Legislation and Subordinate Legislation and are in force in the State of Maharashtra or any part thereof, which are inconsistent with these rules, the Government of Maharashtra hereby makes the following Rules, to provide for the procedure for the Legislation and Subordinate Legislation work of the Government of Maharashtra, namely:
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title. These Rules may be called the Maharashtra Legislation and Subordinate Legislation Procedure Rules, 2023.
2. Definitions.- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, (a) "Act" means an Act of the State Legislature or Parliament, as the case may be;
(b) "Administrative Department"” or “Originating Department" means the Department who administer the Act or who initiate the proposal to enact a new law or to make amendments in the Act or issue notifications/orders under Act;
(c) "Article" means an Article of the Constitution of India; (d) "Assembly" means the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly; (e) “Bill" means a Bill to be introduced or has been introduced in the House of the Maharashtra State Legislature;
(f) "Bye-laws" means the bye-laws made by any statutory authority under the Act;
(g) "Constitution" means the Constitution of India; (h) "Council" means the Maharashtra Legislative Council; (i) "Expediency" means any any Legislative Legislative Proposal forwarded by the Administrative Department to the Law and Judiciary Department for examining the legal and constitutional feasibility of the proposal; (j) "Financial Memorandum" means the Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill containing the estimate of recurring and non-recurring expenditure, which would involve on its enactment, from the Consolidated Fund of the State;
(k) "Instructions” means the Instructions of the President under the proviso to clause (1) of Article 213 of the Constitution requires to promulgate an पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ४
# Page 5
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
Ordinance by the Governor;
(1) "Legislation" means the Legislative Proposal of the Administrative Department/ Originating Department;
(m) "Legislation Branch" means the Legislation Branch of the Law and Judiciary Department, which undertakes the scrutiny of the Legislative Proposals and Subordinate Legislative Proposals forwarded by the Administrative Department/ Originating Department;
(n) "Legislative Policy" means the policy framed by the Administrative Department/ Originating Department in respect of the Legislative Proposal;
(0) "Legislative Proposal" means the proposal of the Administrative Department/ Originating Department to enact a law or to make amendments in the Act either by introducing a Bill in the Maharashtra State Legislature or by promulgating an Ordinance by the Governor; (p) "Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation" the Memorandum appended to the Bill providing details of powers taken by the Government or the Authorities Subordinate to the Government, to make rules, regulations, issue notifications, orders, etc;
(q) "Notification" means a notification issued in exercise of the powers conferred under any Act, Ordinance or Rules and which is published in the Official Gazette;
(r) "Official Gazette" means the Gazette of State of Maharashtra; (s) "Ordinance" means an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor under Article 213 (1) or by President under Article 123(1) of the Constitution; (t) "Publication" means publication of Bill, Act, Ordinance, Notification, Order, rules, bye-laws or regulations, etc., in the Official Gazette; (u) "Regulations" means the Regulations made under any Act, Ordinance or Rules by the authority Subordinate to the Administrative Department; (v) "Repugnancy" means the inconsistency between the laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislature of State as provided in Article 254 of the Constitution;
(w)"Rules" means the rules made in exercise of the powers conferred under any Act or Ordinance;
(x) "Statement" means the Statement appended to the Ordinance; (y) "Statement of Objects and Reasons" means the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill;
(z) "Subordinate Legislation" means instruments (it includes rules, notifications, orders, bye-laws, regulations, etc.) made by the Administrative Department/ Originating Department or by authority Subordinate to it, by exercising the powers conferred on it by the Act.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ५
# Page 6
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
CHAPTER II
WORK DONE IN LEGISLATION BRANCH
3. Work done in Legislation Branch.- In the Law and Judiciary Department, in the Legislation Branch, the following work is done.
(I) Legislation Work:
(a) Examine the legislative proposals (Expediency) forwarded by the Administrative Department of Mantralaya to make amendments in the State Acts and to enact new Acts (of which subject matter falling in List II and List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India) and to make amendment in Central Acts (of which subject matter falling in List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution) and give legal feasibility/views/opinion thereon.
(b) Examine the Expediency of Non-Official Bills forwarded by the Parliamentary Affairs Department to amend State Acts and Central Acts and give legal feasibility/views/opinion thereon.
(c) Drafting and processing of Government Bills forwarded by the Administrative Departments.
(d) Drafting and processing of Ordinances forwarded by the Administrative Departments of Mantralaya.
(e) Proof/Final reading of draft Bill/Ordinance (English and Marathi).
(f) Processing work related to Government Bills and Ordinances.
(g) Reading of all Bills introduced in the State Legislature (English and Marathi).
(h) Publication of English Bills in the Official Gazette under article 348(3) of Constitution of India, after introduction in House of the State Legislature.
(i) Forwarding Authentic copies of Bills received from the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, passed by both Houses of the Maharashtra State Legislature to Governor/President, for assent.
(j) Publication of Acts/Ordinances in the Official Gazette.
(k) Reading of all Gazette copies of Acts and Ordinances published in the Official Gazette (English and Marathi).
(1) Issue Corrigenda/Errata to Acts and Ordinances, if required.
(II) Subordinate Legislation Work:
(a) Scrutiny/vetting of Rules, Notifications, Orders, etc., to be issued by Administrative Departments of Mantralaya under Central and State Acts or Ordinances.
(b) To give opinion on proposed Rules, Notifications, Orders, to be issued by Administrative Departments of Mantralaya under Central and State Acts or Ordinances.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ६
# Page 7
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(III) Work relating to updation of State Acts:
(a) Preparation and updation of Reprints of State Acts.
(b) Proof reading of all Reprints of State Acts and Maharashtra Code, forwarded by the Government Press.
(c) Uploading of updated copies of State Acts on website of the Law and Judiciary Department (lj.maharashtra.gov.in) and on the India Code Portal (indiacode.nic.in - Government of India website).
(IV) Republication of Central Acts and Ordinances: Work related to republication of Central Acts and Ordinances forwarded by the Government of India in the Maharashtra Government Gazette for general information.
(V) Miscellaneous Work:
(a) Supply of List of State Acts and Ordinances to other States every year.
(b) Applications under the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(c) Applications on Public Grievances Portal (PG Portal), Aple Sarkar, E Samiksha Portal.
(d) Correspondence from/with Government of India, other State Governments, Private individuals, etc.
CHAPTER III
TIME FRAME FOR FORWARDING LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO LAW AND JUDICIARY DEPARTMENT
4. Time frame for forwarding Legislative Proposals to Law and Judiciary Department.- (1) Every Legislative Proposal undergoes through various stages as explained in rules 5 and 12.
(2) The Administrative Department/Originating Department shall follow the minimum time frame given below, for forwarding Legislative Proposals to the Law and Judiciary Department, so that the officers of Legislation Branch will get sufficient time for examining legal and constitutional feasibility of the proposal, drafting and processing the proposal and work related thereto.
TIME FRAME
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Category of Bill/Ordinance | Number of Clauses | Time frame to forward Legislative Proposals to Law and Judiciary Department |
| (1) | (2) | (3) |
| Small Bill | (a) Less than 10 clauses | 7 days before the commencement of the Session of the State Legislature. |
|  | (b) More than 10 clauses but less than | 15 days before the commencement of the Session of the State Legislature. |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ७
# Page 8
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|  | 25 clauses. |  |
| Small Ordinance | Less than 25 clauses | 7 days before bringing proposal for Cabinet approval. |
| Medium Bill | More than 25 clauses and less than 50 clauses | 21 days before the commencement of the Session of the State Legislature. |
| Medium Ordinance | More than 25 clauses and less than 50 clauses | 15 days before bringing proposal for Cabinet approval. |
| Comprehensive Bill | More than 50 clauses | 30 days before the commencement of the Session of the State Legislature. |
| Comprehensive Ordinance | More than 50 clauses | 21 days before bringing proposal for Cabinet approval. |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note.- Until the process of pending proposals received before session is completed, the Legislative Proposals received during the Session will not be considered on priority by the Law and Judiciary Department, for introduction in the same Session.
CHAPTER IV
BILL PROCESSING STAGES
5. Bill processing stages.
(1) Initiation of proposal.- Every proposal of Legislation will be initiated in the Administrative Department to which the subject matter of the Legislation relates.
(2) Formulation of Policy/preparation of proposal by Administrative Department. Every Originating Department will formulate the policy before preparing any Legislative Proposal, it includes the purpose of the Legislation, scope of the Legislation, achievements, administrative approval of relevant Departments, financial aspects, etc.
(3) Concurrence of other Departments.- When the policy is prepared by the Originating Department, and if that policy affects the policy of other Departments or on administrative grounds, it requires the approval of other Departments, the Originating Department shall take concurrence of those Departments. The Originating Department shall also obtain the opinion/ views of the concerned authorities as it deems necessary, on administrative issues involved in the Legislative Proposal.
(4) Approval of Finance Department.- If any financial implications are involved or the expenditure would require from the Consolidated Fund of the State, after enactment of law, then the consultation or approval of the Finance Department is required. In such cases, the Original Department shall take the approval of the Finance Department.
(5) Refer file to Law and Judiciary Department.-Every Legislative Proposal before submitting to Cabinet, shall be referred to the Law and Judiciary
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ८
# Page 9
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
Department, for examining the legal and constitutional feasibility of the proposal.
(a) New Legislation. If the Legislative Proposal is to make a new law, the Originating Department shall prepare self-contained Note/detailed background note of the proposal and a tentative draft Bill with Statement of Objects and Reasons in English and shall obtained the remarks of the related Authorities/Departments.
(b) Amending Legislation/Amendments in Act.- If the proposal is to amend the existing Act, the Originating Department shall prepare amendments in tabular format or in draft Bill format. The Originating Department shall prepare self-contained Note/detailed background note with reasons/justifications of the proposal/proposed amendments and if necessary obtain the remarks of the related Authorities/Departments.
Thereafter the proposal shall be referred to the Law and Judiciary Department, for examining the legal and constitutional feasibility.
(6) Examining Expediency and Cabinet Note.- While examining expediency of the Legislative Proposal in the Law and Judiciary Department, the following aspects will be examined:
(a) Understand the concepts of Legislative Proposal received from the Originating Department.
(b) Examine whether it is necessary to amend the law or enact new law; or the purpose can be achieved by making Subordinate Legislation.
(c) Examine whether the Legislative Proposal is within the framework of the constitutional provisions which includes,
(i) whether the State Legislature is competent to enact a law on the subject or competent to amend the Act;
(ii) to examine under which entry/entries of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India as well as other provisions of the Constitution, the subject matter of the proposed Legislation falls;
(iii) whether the provisions of the proposed Legislation are repugnant to any Central Act and necessary to reserve the Bill for the President's assent under Article 254(2) or any other articles of the Constitution; (iv) in case of promulgation of an Ordinance, whether the Instructions from the President is required under the proviso to Article 213 of the Constitution of India;
(v) whether the Bill requires the previous sanction of the President under the proviso to Article 304(b) of the Constitution before introduction of the Bill in the Maharashtra State Legislature;
(vi) whether the Bill involves any financial implications which would requires the recommendation of the Governor under Article 207 of the Constitution;
(vii) whether the Bill is a Money Bill or not (Article 199 of Constitution); (viii) whether the Bill requires to reserve for President's assent under Article 31A of the Constitution;
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ९
# Page 10
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(ix) whether the proposed law is for giving effect to the Directive Principles of State Policy (Chapter IV of Constitution) and requires to reserve for President's assent under Article 31C of the Constitution; (x) whether the provisions of the Bill are applicable to the Scheduled Areas and the Scheduled Tribes (Fifth Schedule) and are in consonance with the provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA Act).
(d) (i) In case of Principal Legislation, whether the Department has prepared detail Note about the provisions thereof and its policy and a tentative draft with the approval of the Government.
(ii) In case of Amending Legislation, whether the Department has prepared detail Note of the amendments with justification therefor and a tentative draft of amendments with the approval of the Government.
(e) In case of amending legislation, whether it is necessary to make consequential amendments in the same Act or other Acts.
(f) Whether the proposed amendments/provisions are contrary to any existing Acts (State Acts or Central Acts) or overlapping to each other.
(g) Whether it is necessary to give overriding effect to the amending provisions over the other provisions of the Principal Act or provisions of other Acts.
(h) Whether it would be necessary to incorporate, saving clause or validation clause or repeal clause or removal of difficulty clause in the draft.
(i) Whether the proposed provision would require to give retrospective effect.
(j) Whether the Administrative Department has consulted with other Departments if the Legislative Proposal affects the provisions of Act of other Departments or affects the policy of other Departments.
(k) Whether the Administrative Department has taken approval of the Finance Department in cases where the proposal involves financial implications on the Consolidated Fund of the State.
(7) Submission of Note.- (a) The proposal of the Department will be examined considering the above legal and constitutional aspects. At this stage, the Law and Judiciary Department will advise on the necessity or desirability of such Legislation in the light of the existing laws and also constitutional feasibility thereof. After scrutiny of the Legislative Proposal, a detail Note will be prepared and submitted for approval,
(i) to return the file with preliminary observations or with
observations for modifications in the proposal; or
(ii) return the file with constitutional and legal feasibility, subject to observations to modify the proposal; or
(iii) return the file with constitutional and legal feasibility for Cabinet approval; or
(iv) return the file with observations regarding lack of legislative competency of the State Legislature.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १०
# Page 11
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(b) If the tentative draft is forwarded along with the file, the Law and Judiciary Department may, (i) give approval to the proposal with constitutional and legal feasibility for Cabinet approval; or
(ii) make necessary observations in respect of provisions of the draft Bill and may suggest to modify the amendments or provisions of the Bill; or (iii) if consultation of other Department has not taken, it may advice the Originating Department for consultation with other Departments or concerned authorities, etc.
(8) Subject matter of proposal.- The Legislation Branch will examine the proposal and if, the proposal is legally feasible, communicate its views to the concerned Department (with or without observations). The Note will provide,
(a) subject matter of the Bill (entries of List II/III of the VII Schedule of the Constitution),
(b) repugnancy to any Central Acts arises or not,
(c) Previous Sanction of the President under clause (b) of Article 304 of the Constitution is required or not,
(d) Governor's Recommendation under Article 207 of the Constitution is required or not,
(e) if the proposal is legally and constitutionally feasible, may suggest, to move proposal for Cabinet approval.
(9) Preparation of draft Bill by Originating Department.- (a) The Originating Department shall comply with the observations/objections raised by the Law and Judiciary Department and shall modify the Legislative Proposal accordingly.
(b) (i) Statement of Objects and Reasons shall be appended to every draft Bill. The Originating Department shall prepare the Statement of Objects and Reasons, it will contain in brief the background of existing provisions, reasons of amendments/ enactment of law and objects of the amendments or salient features of the Bill. If it is a Principal Legislation, will contain in brief the reasons for enactment of law and salient features thereof.
(ii) If the Bill would involve financial implications, the Bill shall be accompanied by a Financial Memorandum providing recurring /non-recurring expenditure with the approval of the Finance Department.
(10) Cabinet Note.- (a) If it is decided by the Department to proceed with the Legislative Proposal, the Originating Department shall prepare Cabinet Note and route the Cabinet Note through the Law and Judiciary Department. The Cabinet Note shall in corporate -
(i) broad features of the Legislative Proposal bringing out clearly the need, scope and object of the proposed Legislation;
(ii) the opinion of the Law and Judiciary Department as regards expediency of undertaking Legislation;
(iii) the views of the Finance Department; if any,
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी ११
# Page 12
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(iv) the views of other concerned Department, if obtained;
(v) set out all the implications of the proposed Legislation;
(vi) permission to make necessary changes in the draft proposal by the Law and Judiciary Department on drafting and legal point of view; (vii) mention the points for the Cabinet decision.
(b) append a tentative draft Bill to Cabinet Note which shall be referred to the Law and Judiciary Department for drafting, if the Cabinet approves the proposal;
(11) Changes suggested by Cabinet.- If the Cabinet directs any changes to be made in the draft Bill or Statement of Objects and Reasons or Memorandum submitted for its approval, then such changes shall be carried out by the Originating Department in the draft Bill.
(12) Cabinet Sub-Committee.- If the Cabinet refers the draft Bill to the Cabinet Sub-Committee, the Originating Department shall place the proposal before the Cabinet Sub-Committee and after approval by the Cabinet Sub-Committee/Cabinet, forward the file to the Law and Judiciary Department for scrutiny of draft.
(13) Forward draft Bill to Law and Judiciary Department for scrutiny.
(a) After Cabinet approval, the Originating Department shall prepare the draft Bill in English with Statement of Objects and Reasons, in duplicate as per the Cabinet decision and shall forward the file to the Law and Judiciary Department, for scrutiny of the draft Bill along with the Cabinet decision.
(b) The Originating Department shall forward two copies of the draft Bill typed on half margin with double spacing along with the file to facilitate the scrutiny thereof.
(c) The Originating Department shall also forward soft copy of the draft Bill.
(d) The Originating Department shall depute the officer who is conversant with the proposal for discussion while drafting and finalizing the draft Bill.
(14) Scrutiny of Bill.- The Law and Judiciary Department will make scrutiny of the draft Bill and will finalise English draft with Statement of Objects and Reasons and, if required, the Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation and Financial Memorandum, in consultation with the Officers of the Originating Department.
(15) Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation.-The Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation will be prepared, if the draft Bill contains the provisions of delegation of powers to the Government or other authorities of the Government and be appended to the draft Bill after Statement of Objects and Reasons.
(16) Financial Memorandum.- The Financial Memorandum shall be prepared by the Originating Department in consultation with the Finance Department, if the draft Bill contains the provisions which would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State after its enactment.
The Financial Memorandum will provide the estimates of the recurring and non-recurring expenditure. The draft of the Financial Memorandum will be
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १२
# Page 13
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
finalized at the time of finalizing the draft Bill and will be appended to the Bill at the end.
(17) Forward draft Bill to Originating Department.- After finalizing the English draft Bill in the Law and Judiciary Department, the file alongwith final draft Bill in English will be returned to the Originating Department for concurrence and to verify whether the draft Bill meets the requirements of the Department and is as per the Cabinet decision.
(18) Originating Department to communicate to Law and Judiciary Department. If the draft Bill meets the requirements of the Originating Department, the Department shall communicate the same to the Law and Judiciary Department. If any changes/corrections are suggested by the Originating Department in the draft Bill, the Originating Department shall show the corrections in ink and the corrected copy shall be sent to the Law and Judiciary Department.
(19) Proof of Bill.- When the draft Bill is finalized, the Law and Judiciary Department will send the English draft Bill to the Government Press for obtaining proof thereof.
(20) Marathi and Hindi translation of draft from Directorate of Languages. The Law and Judiciary Department will send two English copies of the draft Bill to the Directorate of Languages for Marathi and Hindi translation, respectively.
(21) Proof of Bill in Marathi and Hindi.- The Directorate of Languages will translate the English draft Bill into Marathi and Hindi and will send it to the Government Press for proof.
(22) Checking of Marathi and Hindi copies.- The Directorate of Languages will check the Marathi and Hindi copies of the draft Bill and will send it to the Law and Judiciary Department.
(23) Proof checking of English and Marathi copies by Law and Judiciary Department.- The Law and Judiciary Department will check the English and Marathi proofs of the draft Bill. The Marathi copy of the draft Bill will be finalized in consultation with officers of the Directorate of Languages.
(24) Printing of final copies from Government Press.- After approval of English and Marathi proofs of draft Bill, the Law and Judiciary Department will sent it to the Government Press for final printing.
(25) Final Bill copies checking.- The Law and Judiciary Department will check the English and Marathi final copies of the draft Bill received from the Government Press.
(26) Forward final Marathi and English copies to Originating Department for checking/approval.- The Law and Judiciary Department will forward the English and Marathi final copies of the draft Bill to the Originating Department for checking and approval.
(27) Concurrence from Originating Department.- (a) The Originating Department will check the Marathi and English copies of the draft Bill,
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १३
# Page 14
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
compare Marathi copy with the English copy and will communicate to the Law and Judiciary Department, for further necessary action in respect of the Bill.
(b) If any changes are made or suggested by the Originating Department in the draft Bill, the Department shall show the same in ink in the draft Bill.
(28) Previous sanction of President.- If the provisions of the Bill contain restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among the States, the Originating Department shall obtain the previous sanction of the President under the proviso to Article 304(b) of the Constitution. The necessary letter to be forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, will be prepared by the Law and Judiciary Department.
(29) Governor's Recommendation.- If the Bill contains the provisions for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of Article 199 of the Constitution, imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of tax, borrowing of money, guarantee by State, appropriation of moneys out of Consolidated Fund, etc; or if the Bill enacts as Act and brought into operation, it would involve the expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State, the recommendation of the Governor under Article 207 of the Constitution is necessary for introduction /consideration of the Bill in the House. The necessary Note will be prepared by the Law and Judiciary Department to obtain the recommendation of the Governor for introduction / consideration of the Bill in the House.
(30) Submission of Notice to Minister for signature.- The Law and Judiciary Department will submit Notice (the motion for leave to introduce Bill in House and Marathi copy of the Bill) for the signature of the concerned Minister through the Secretary of the Originating Department.
The Originating Department will obtain the signature of the concerned Minister on the Notice and on the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Marathi Bill and will return the papers to the concerned officer of the Law and Judiciary Department.
(31) Notice of Bill to State Legislature for introduction of Bill.- (1) The Law and Judiciary Department will send Notice of the Bill to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislative Assembly/Council, for introduction of the Bill in the House with the following documents, (a) Motion for leave to introduce Bill in House which is signed by the concerned Minister.
(b) Marathi copy of the Bill which is signed by the concerned Minister.
(c) Letter containing the subject matter of the Bill (Entries of Lists of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution) and whether the Bill is Money Bill or not.
(d) Recommendation of Governor under Article 207 (1) or (3) of the Constitution, if required, the copy of Order of the recommendation.
(e) 5 copies of Bill, Marathi, English and Hindi, each.
(f) Previous sanction of the President under clause (b) of article 304 of the
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १४
# Page 15
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
Constitution, if required.
(2) The copy of the Notice of the Bill will be sent to the Parliamentary Affairs Department, for information.
(32) Intimation to Originating Department regarding Notice.- After giving Notice of the Bill to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, the Law and Judiciary Department will inform the same to the concerned Department.
(33) Citation of Bill.- The concerned officer of the Originating Department shall collect the Citation Form from the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly/Council and will give the same to the concerned Minister for introduction and passing of Bill.
(34) Briefing to Minister.- The officers of the Originating Department will brief to the concerned Minister in respect of the provisions of the Bill and will remain present in the Gallery of the concerned House of the State Legislature while discussion on the Bill.
(35) Introduction of Bill in Maharashtra Legislative Assembly/Council.
The Bill will be introduced (in Marathi) in the House of the State Legislature (Assembly/Council) to whom the Notice of motion has been given.
(36) Publication of Bill.- After introduction of the Bill in the Assembly/Council, the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat will publish the Bill in the Official Gazette. The Marathi Bill will be published in Extraordinary Gazette, Part V, English Bill will be published in Part VA and Hindi in Part VII.
(37) Publication of authoritative text of Bill by Law and Judiciary Department.- After introduction of a Bill in the House, the authoritative text of the Bill in English will be published by the Law and Judiciary Department in the Official Gazette, in Part VIII, as required by Article 348(3) of the Constitution.
(38) Bill Passing by Assembly.-(1) After introduction of a Bill in the Legislative Assembly (called the Assembly Bill), the "First stage" consists of discussion on the Bill and generally on any one of the following motion, (a) that the Bill be taken into consideration; or
(b) that Bill be referred to a Select Committee composed of such number of members of the Assembly and with instructions to report before such date, as may be specified in the motion; or
(c) that the Bill be referred to a Joint Committee of both Houses, composed of such number of members and with instructions to report before such date, as may be specified in the motion; or (d) that the Bill be circulated for the purpose of eliciting opinion thereon, within such period as may be specified in the motion.
(2) The "Second stage" consists of clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill as introduced. If the Bill is referred to Select Committee or Joint Committee, the report will be submitted by the Select Committee /Joint Committee to the House. The said report will be laid on table of the House
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १५
# Page 16
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
and the Bill will be considered clause-by-clause.
(3) The "Third stage" consists of discussion on the motion that the Bill be passed. If the motion is passed, the Bill will be considered as passed by the Legislative Assembly.
(4) After Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly, the Speaker will sign a certificate at the foot of the Bill in the following form:
"This Bill was passed by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Maharashtra on the ......day of ………………...20...
Speaker.".
(5) The certified Bill will be transmitted to the Secretary of the Legislative Council for the consideration of the Council.
(39) Bill passing by Council.- (1) The copies of the Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly will be laid on the table of the Legislative Council.
(2) In Legislative Council, the "First stage" consists of discussion on the Bill and on any one of the motion specified above referred sub-rule 38(1).
(3) The "Second Stage" consists of the Bill will be considered clause-by clause by the Legislative Council.
(4) The "Third stage" consists of discussion on the motion that the Bill be passed. If the motion is passed, the Bill will be considered as passed by the Legislative Council.
(5) After Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council, if the Bill is the Legislative Assembly Bill, the Speaker will sign at the foot of the Bill; and if the Bill is the Legislative Council, the Chairman will sign at the foot of the Bill.
Note.- Detail procedure of passing of Bills are provided in rules 111 to 159 of the Maharashtra Assembly Rules and in rules 107 to 154 of the Maharashtra Council Rules. It includes the procedure of passing of Money Bill, Financial Bill, amendments in Bill, Bill referred to Select Committee/Joint Committee, withdrawal of Bill, rejection of Bill by House, etc.
(40) Amendments in Bill.-(1) If amendments are made by the House, the Bill will be passed with amendments. The Bill passed with amendments will be transmitted to another House.
(2) If another House agrees, the said Bill will be passed with amendments by that House.
(41) If Bill referred to Joint Committee.-(1) If the Bill is referred to Joint Committee of both Houses of the State Legislature, the Committee may make necessary amendments in the Bill. The Joint Committee Report along with amended Bill will be tabled in the House from which the Bill was referred to Joint Committee.
(2) The Bill will be considered and passed by that House as per the procedure provided in sub-rule (38) and will be transmitted to another House (3) The transmitted Bill will be tabled on the House. The Bill will be considered and passed by that House as per the procedure provided in sub rule (39). The said Bill will be considered as passed by both Houses.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १६
# Page 17
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(42) Authentic copies of Bill.- When the Bill is passed by both Houses of the Maharashtra State Legislature, the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat will forward the authentic copies of Bill signed by Speaker of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly, when Bill is introduced in the Assembly, or by Chairman of the Maharashtra Legislative Council, when Bill is introduced in the Council, to the Law and Judiciary Department.
(43) Forwarding Authentic copies of Bill to Governor/President for assent.- (1) The Law and Judiciary Department will sent the authentic copies received from the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat to the Governor / President, as the case may be, for the assent under Article 200 of the Constitution, along with the copies of Bill of all stages.
(2) Except as provided in rule 6, all Bills are reserved for the assent of Governor.
(44) Publication of Act.- (1) When the authentic copies of the Bill are signed by the Governor / President, as the case may be, the Law and Judiciary Department will publish the Bill as an Act of the State Legislature in the Official Gazette.
(2) The Marathi Act will be published in Part IV, English Act will be published in Part VIII and Hindi Act will be published in Part VII, in the Official Gazette.
The Hindi Act will be published by Directorate of languages after publication of Marathi and English Act by the Law and Judiciary Department.
(45) Checking Gazette copy of Act.- The Government Press will send the Gazette copies of the Act to the Originating Department and to the Law and Judiciary Department and to the concerned offices as mentioned in the Government Resolution of the Law and Judiciary Department. The Gazette copies will be checked and if any printing error is noticed, the errata will be issued to the said Act by the Law and Judiciary Department.
(46) Forwarding authentic copies of Bill.- The authentic copies of the Bill which has been signed by the Governor or President, as the case may be, one authentic copy thereof will be retained in the Law and Judiciary Department and another copy will be returned to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat.
(47) Bringing into force provisions of Act. (1) If the Bill provides the commencement clause for bringing into force the provisions of the Act, the Originating Department shall publish the notification in the Official Gazette, specifying the date from which the Act will come into force.
(2) The Originating Department will decide the date of commencement of Act with the approval of the concerned Minister.
(3) The Originating Department will before publication of notification in the Official Gazette as specified in clause (1) above, will forward the notification to the Law and Judiciary Department, for scrutiny.
(48) Making of Rules. If the Act provides to make rules, the Originating Department shall make rules within six months by following due procedure
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १७
# Page 18
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
and shall publish it in the Official Gazette.
6. Procedure when Bill is reserved for President's assent.
(1) If any provision of a Bill passed by the State Legislature, with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List (List III) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, is repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing law with respect to that matter, then such Bill shall be required to reserve for the assent of the President under Article 254 (2) of the Constitution.
(2) The Law and Judiciary Department will forward the authentic copies received from the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat to the Secretary to the Governor under Article 200 of the Constitution, along with letter and ten copies of Bill of all stages, for the assent of the President.
(3) The copy of the assent letter will be forwarded to the Special Commissioner to the Government of Maharashtra, Maharashtra Sadan, Copernicus Road, New Delhi 110001, along with the two copies of Bill of all stages for information and taking follow up.
(4) The copy of the said letter will be sent to the concerned Administrative Department of the Bill for information.
(5) The Secretary to the Governor will send the authentic copies of the said Bill to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, for the assent of the President. The copy of the said letter will be forwarded to,
(a) the Secretary (Legislation), Law and Judiciary Department, Mantralaya,
(b) the Secretary to the Originating Department of the Bill, and
(c) the Special Commissioner to the Government of Maharashtra, Maharashtra Sadan, Copernicus Road, New Delhi 110001, for information and taking follow up.
7. Queries/reference received from Central Government on Bill.- (1) If any query raised by any Ministry of the Government of India or any references received in respect of the Bill, the letter received from the Ministry of Home Affairs (through Office of Governor) and the references will be transferred to the Originating Department of the Bill, for necessary compliance.
(2) The Originating Department shall prepare the justification to the queries raised by the Ministry of the Government of India and shall submit the file along with letter to be forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Secretary (Legislation) Law and Judiciary Department, for approval.
(3) After approval of letter/reply by the Law and Judiciary Department, the Secretary of the Originating Department shall send the reply to the Ministry of Home Affairs. The copy of the letter shall be sent to the Secretary (Legislation), Law and Judiciary Department and to the Special Commissioner to the Government of Maharashtra, Maharashtra Sadan, Copernicus Road, New Delhi 110001.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १८
# Page 19
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(4) As per the instructions of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Originating Department shall send the above reply to the Ministry of Home Affairs within thirty days from the receipt of the said reference.
8. Withhold assent to Bill.- (1) If the Governor withholds the assent to the Bill under Article 200 of the Constitution or the President withholds the assent to the Bill under Article 201 of the Constitution, any communication received to the Law and Judiciary Department will be forwarded to the concerned Originating Department of the Bill.
(2) The Originating Department shall inform/bring to the notice of the same to the Cabinet.
(3) The Law and Judiciary Department will return the authentic copies of the Bill received, to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat and one copy will be retained in the Department.
9. Withdrawal of Bill from House.- (1) When the Originating Department decides to withdraw any Bill from either of the House of State Legislature, it shall take the approval of the Cabinet for such withdrawal.
(2) The Originating Department shall prepare the motion in consultation with the Law and Judiciary Department and shall send such motion to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat under the signature of the concerned Minister, for withdrawal of Bill.
10. Withdrawal of authentic copies of Bills pending for assent.- (1) If the Originating Department decides to withdraw any authentic copy of Bill which is pending before the Governor or President, as the case may be, for assent, the Originating Department shall take the approval of the Cabinet for such withdrawal. Before submitting proposal to Cabinet it shall consult the Law and Judiciary Department.
(2) After Cabinet approval, the Originating Department shall prepare a draft letter to be forwarded for withdrawal of authentic copies of Bill in consultation with the Law and Judiciary Department. The Department shall send the letter to Secretary to Governor or to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, as the case may be.
11. Forwarding withdrawn authentic copies of Bill to Legislature Secretary.
The authentic copies of the Bill which has withdrawn from the Governor or President, as the case may be, will be returned to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat and one copy thereof will be retained in the Law and Judiciary Department.
CHAPTER V
ORDINANCE PROCESSING STAGES
12. Procedure of making reference of Ordinance to Law and Judiciary Department and Ordinance processing stages.- When the Originating Department proposes to promulgate an Ordinance to enact a new law or to make amendments in the Act, the following procedure shall be followed: (1) Promulgation of an Ordinance. - The Ordinance can be promulgated when both Houses of the State Legislature are not in Session and the Governor is
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी १९
# Page 20
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, the Governor may promulgate an Ordinance under Article 213 of the Constitution of India.
(2) Formulation of Policy/Preparation of proposal by Originating Department. The Originating Department will before preparing any Legislative Proposal of an Ordinance, formulate the policy; it includes purpose of the Legislation, scope of Legislation, achievements, administrative approval of the concerned Department, financial aspects, etc.
(3) Urgency to promulgate Ordinance.- When the Originating Department decides to promulgate an Ordinance, the Department shall justify the need/urgency for promulgation of an Ordinance in the file.
(4) Preparation of draft Ordinance with Statement.-The Originating Department shall prepare the draft of the Ordinance with Statement.
(5) Procedure of Ordinance processing. The procedure provided in rule 5(1) to 5(27) (regarding Bill), will be applicable for preparation and finalization of draft Ordinance.
(6) Forward file to Law and Judiciary Department.- (a) The Originating Department shall forward the file to the Law and Judiciary Department. The Law and Judiciary Department shall follow the procedure provided in rule 5(1) to 5(27) (regarding Bill).
(b) After finalizing the draft Ordinance, the printed copies of the draft Ordinance (English and Marathi) will be forwarded by the Law and Judiciary Department to the Originating Department, for checking and approval.
(7) Submission of draft Ordinance to Governor.- If the draft Ordinance meets the requirements of the Department, the Originating Department shall submit the draft Ordinance through Chief Secretary, concerned Minister and the Chief Minister, to the Governor for his signature on Marathi copy (Green copy) supplied by the Law and Judiciary Department.
(8) Presidents Instructions.- (a) If the provisions of the proposed Ordinance are repugnant to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or an existing law with respect to the matters enumerated in Concurrent List (List III) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, it shall be necessary to obtain the Instructions of the President, for promulgation of an Ordinance.
(b) The Originating Department shall obtain the Instructions from the President for promulgation of an Ordinance. The necessary Letter to be forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India will be given by the Law and Judiciary Department to the Originating Department.
(c) After President's Instructions, the Originating Department shall submit the draft Ordinance through the Chief Minister to Governor for his signature.
(9) Publication of an Ordinance.-(a) After Governor's signature on the Ordinance copy, the Secretary of the Originating Department shall sign below the Governor's signature and shall immediately forward the file to the Law and Judiciary Department with necessary Note, for publication of an
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २०
# Page 21
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
Ordinance in the Official Gazette. The Law and Judiciary Department will publish the Ordinance in the Official Gazette.
(b) The Marathi Ordinance will be published in Part IV, English in Part VIII and Hindi in part VII, in the Official Gazette. The Hindi Ordinance will be published in the Official Gazette, by Directorate of Languages.
(10) Checking of Gazette Copies of Ordinance.-.- The Government Press will send the Gazette copies of the Ordinance to the Originating Department and to the Law and Judiciary Department and to the concerned offices as mentioned in the Government Resolution of the Law and Judiciary Department. The Gazette copies will be checked and if any printing error is noticed, the errata will be issued by the Law and Judiciary Department.
(11) Post-promulgation action.-As soon as, the Ordinance is promulgated, the following action will be taken by the Law and Judiciary Department, (a) After the publication of an Ordinance in the Official Gazette, the Law and Judiciary Department will send the copy of the Ordinance to the Office of the Governor;
(b) One copy of the Ordinance will be sent to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislative Assembly and one copy to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislative Council, for being laid before both Houses of the Legislature as required under clause (2) of article 213 of the Constitution; and copy of the letter along with Ordinance will be sent to the Parliamentary Affairs Department;
(c) The Originating Department shall send letter of motion signed by concerned Minister to the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat to lay the Ordinance before both Houses of the Maharashtra State Legislature. The Law and Judiciary Department will give the format of motion to lay Ordinance before both Houses of the Maharashtra State Legislature to the Originating Department.
(12) Procedure provided in paragraphs in rule 5(14) to (47) of Bill will apply.- (a) The Law and Judiciary Department will take necessary steps to convert the Ordinance into Bill.
(b) The final English draft Bill will be prepared by the Law and Judiciary Department and for preparing Marathi and Hindi draft Bill, the English copy will be sent to the Directorate of Languages.
(c) The procedure provided in rule 5(14) to 5 (47) related to Bill will be applicable for preparation of draft Bill and upto publication of Act in the Official Gazette.
CHAPTER VI
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
13. Refer Statutory Notification, Rules, Orders, etc., to Law and Judiciary Department.- (1) Whenever it is proposed in any Originating Department other than the Law and Judiciary Department, (i) to issue statutory rules, notifications or orders under Act; or
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २१
# Page 22
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(ii) to submit to the Central Government any draft statutory rules, notification or order for issue by them under Central Acts,
the draft of the same shall be referred to the Law and Judiciary Department for opinion or vetting or revision.
(2) The Law and Judiciary Department will examine/vet/make scrutiny of such rules, notifications or orders, from constitutional, legal and drafting point of view.
14. Government Resolutions, Circulars, Administrative Orders/Letters to be issued by Originating Department.- The Government Resolutions, Circulars, Administrative Orders/Letters to be issued by Originating Department shall not be referred to the Law and Judiciary Department for scrutiny, unless specific legal point is raised for the advice of the Law and Judiciary Department. The wordings of such Government Resolutions, Circulars, Administrative Orders/Letters shall be finalized by the Department itself.
15. Regulations and Bye-laws to be issued by Subordinate Authorities. The Regulations and By-laws to be issued by Subordinate Authorities of the Originating Department of Mantralaya, shall not be referred to the Law and Judiciary Department for scrutiny, unless specific legal point is raised for the consideration/scrutiny of the Law and Judiciary Department. The wordings of such Regulations and Bye-laws shall be finalized by the Authorities or Department itself.
16. Procedure of making reference relating to scrutiny of statutory Notification, Rules, Orders, etc.- (1) The Originating Department shall ensure before forwarding any statutory Notification, Rules, Orders, etc., to the Law and Judiciary Department for vetting or scrutiny, (a) obtain the approval of Secretary of the Department to the proposal and, if deemed appropriate by the Secretary of the Department, from the concerned Minister-in-charge;
(b) if the proposal affects the policy of other Department or on administrative grounds, it requires the approval of other Departments; the Originating Department shall consult all other concerned Departments;
(c) follow the model of existing rules, notifications or orders on the same or similar subjects to prepare the draft rules, notifications or orders, as the case may be;
(d) forward two copies of draft in English typed on half margin with double spacing along with the file for vetting/scrutiny;
(e) forward up-to-date copy of the rules, notifications or orders proposed to be amended along with the file;
(f) state the point or points, if any, in connection of the draft which requires special examination by the Law and Judiciary Department.
(2) If the file is relating to any litigation or sub-judice matter, then the Originating Department shall place on file, all relevant documents such as order of Court, affidavits filed in Court, etc.
17. Consultation/approval.- When the Act provides previous consultation/ पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २२
# Page 23
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
approval/sanction/ permission of the concerned authorities/ bodies, is required, before making any rules or issue of notification, the concerned Department shall consult/ take approval/ sanction/permission of the concerned authorities/ bodies, before making such rules or issue of notification.
18. Rule making under Act.- (1) If the Act provides the power of the Government to make rules, the Originating Department shall prepare draft rules as required by Act and shall refer the file alongwith draft to the Law and Judiciary Department, for scrutiny.
(2) The Law and Judiciary Department will make scrutiny of the rules in consultation with the Originating Department officers.
(3) As soon as, the rules are received from the Law and Judiciary Department, the Originating Department shall, after approval of the Government, publish it in the Official Gazette.
(4) The Department shall publish the rule in Marathi and English languages simultaneously, in the Official Gazette.
(5) Originating Department shall send the Gazette copies of the rules to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, to lay before the both Houses of the State Legislature/Committee on Subordinate Legislation.
(6) The Originating Department shall follow the procedure for laying down of rules/notifications before both Houses of the State Legislature as provided in the Assembly/Council Rules.
19. Pre-publication of rules.- (1) When any Act provides the rules shall be made after previous publication, the rules shall be published in the Official Gazette, for information of persons likely to be affected thereby. The provisions of section 24 of the Maharashtra General Clauses Act (I of 1904) will apply for making such rules.
(2) The Originating Department shall, (a) prepare draft rules and shall refer it to the Law and Judiciary Department, for scrutiny/vetting;
(b) as soon as, the rules are received from the Law and Judiciary Department, publish it in the Official Gazette, for inviting objections and suggestions within specified period;
(c) send Gazette copies of rules to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, to lay before both Houses of the State Legislature/Committee on Subordinate Legislation;
(d) on expiry of the specified period, consider the objections and suggestions, if any, received (including objections and suggestions Committee on Subordinate Legislation);
(e) finalize the rules after considering objections and suggestions and shall refer it again to the Law and Judiciary Department, for scrutiny; (f) publish the final rules in the Official Gazette;
(g) will send the final Gazette copies of the rules to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, to lay before both Houses of the State Legislature/Committee on Subordinate Legislation.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २३
# Page 24
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(3) The above procedure shall be followed while making amendments in the said rules.
20. Time frame for framing rules-. (1) If the Act specifically provides to make rules, regulations and bye-laws, within specified period, the Originating Department shall prepare rules, regulations and bye-laws, within that period. If the time limit is not provided, the rules shall be made within a period of six months from the date of relevant Act comes into force. Cases in which, for any reason, this is not possible; it shall be brought to the notice of the concerned Secretary and the Minister, at the earliest.
(2) After rules, regulations and bye-laws are finalized in consultation with the Law and Judiciary Department, the concerned Department shall take steps to publish it in the Official Gazette.
21. Procedure of making recruitment Rules.- (1) Recruitment Rules and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State are made by Act of the State Legislature; or if the Act is not made then, such rules shall be made under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution. The Governor or the person directed by the Governor is empowered to make such rules.
(2) The Originating Department shall, while preparing new recruitment rules or making amendments in the recruitment rules, refer the file to the General Administration Department first for advice/approval.
(3) The Originating Department shall, in case of posts which are under the preview of the Maharashtra Public Service Commission, while preparing new recruitment rules or amendments in the recruitment rules/ conditions of service, the draft rules which are approved by the General Administration Department, refer to the Maharashtra Public Service Commission, for its concurrence/advice: Provided that, the posts which are exempted from the purview of the Maharashtra Public Service Commission (Exemption from Consultation) Regulation, 1965, the recruitment rules of such posts shall not be referred for concurrence/advice to the Maharashtra Public Service Commission.
(4) If the draft recruitment rules/ conditions of service are approved by the General Administration Department and by the Maharashtra Public Service Commission it shall be referred to the Law and Judiciary Department for vetting/scrutiny.
(5) If the recruitment rules/ conditions of service are to be made under the Act, after approval of such rules by the Law and Judiciary Department, the Administrative Department shall publish the same in the Official Gazette, after approval of Government.
(6) The draft recruitment rules/ conditions of service approved by the Law and Judiciary Department are to be made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution, it shall be submitted to the Governor for approval.
(7) After Governor's approval, Originating Department shall publish the recruitment rules/ conditions of service in the Official Gazette.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २४
# Page 25
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(8) The originating Department shall publish the recruitment rules in Marathi and English languages simultaneously, in the Official Gazette.
(9) The Originating Department shall follow the Circulars, Orders, etc., issued by the General Administration Department, from time to time, with respect to recruitment rules and conditions of service.
22. Laying of rules, notifications, etc., before Houses of the State Legislature.
(1) The rules, regulations, bye-laws, notifications, etc., made by the Originating Department or any authority Subordinate thereto, in exercise of the powers conferred by the Constitution, or under any Central Act or under Act of the State Legislature; and which are required to be laid before the House of the State Legislature, the Originating Department shall lay such rules, regulations, bye laws, notifications, etc., as per such provision, before both Houses of the State Legislature or before the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, within the time specified in the Act, after they are made.
(2) The Administrative Department shall follow the Orders and Circulars issued, from time to time by the Parliamentary Affairs Department and Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, in respect of laying down of rules, regulations, bye-laws, notifications, etc., before Houses of the State Legislature and Committee on Subordinate Legislation.
CHAPTER VII
NON-OFFICIAL BILLS
23 Non-Official Bills.- (1) The Parliamentary Affairs Department shall send the copy of Non-official Bill received from the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat to the Law and Judiciary Department, for examining the legal and constitutional feasibility of the Bill.
(2) The Law and Judiciary Department will examine the legal and constitutional feasibility of the Non-official Bill and will send the letter containing opinion to the Parliamentary Affairs Department and copy to the concerned Administrative Department for information.
(3) The Parliamentary Affairs Department shall forward the opinion of the Law and Judiciary Department to the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat.
CHAPTER VIII
DUTIES OF ORIGINATING DEPARTMENT
24. Duties and responsibilities of Originating Department. The Originating Department of Mantralaya shall have the following duties and responsibilities regarding Legislative Proposals (Bill/ Ordinance) and Subordinate Legislation proposals initiated by it.
(1) In case of Bills.
(a) Intimate to the Law and Judiciary Department about the proposed Legislative Proposals in advance.
(b) forward the Legislative Proposals to the Law and Judiciary Department within time frame specified in rule 4.
(c) Formulate the Policy/prepare Legislative Proposal with detail Note,
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २५
# Page 26
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
containing, purpose of the Legislation, scope of Legislation, achievements, administrative approvals, financial aspects, etc.
(d) Obtain views/consult with other Departments or Authorities before referring file to the Law and Judiciary Department.
(e) Take approval of the Finance Department to the proposal when expenditure would involve from the Consolidated Fund of the State.
(f) Refer every Legislative Proposal to the Law and Judiciary Department for examining the legal and constitutional point of view before taking Cabinet approval.
(g) Prepare tentative draft Bill with Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) for every Legislative Proposal.
(h) Prepare Cabinet Note of every Legislative Proposal and route it through the Law and Judiciary Department.
(i) After Cabinet approval, forward draft Bill to the Law and Judiciary Department for scrutiny along with the Cabinet decision.
(j) Forward hard and soft copy of the draft Bill (in duplicate) along with the file to the Law and Judiciary Department for scrutiny.
(k) Remain present for discussion with the officers of the Law and Judiciary Department while finalizing the draft Bill.
(1) Check/verify English and Marathi draft copies of the Bill forwarded by the Law and Judiciary Department.
(m) Assist the officers of the Law and Judiciary Department to obtain the Governor's recommendation for introduction/consideration of the Bill in the House.
(n) Obtain signature of the concerned Minister on the Notice of the Bill.
(0) Brief to the concerned Minister about provisions of the Bill.
(p) Collect Citation Forms of the Bill from the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat and to give it to the concerned Minister.
(9) Remain present in the Gallery of the House at the time of discussion on Bill and passing of the Bill.
(r) Check Gazette copies of the Act after its publication in the Official Gazette.
(s) take necessary action to issue necessary notification/rules under the Act.
(2) In cases of Ordinances.
(a) Formulate the Policy/prepare Legislative Proposal with detail Note, stating the purpose of the Legislation, scope of Legislation, achievements, administrative approvals, financial aspects, etc.
(b) Provide the urgency to promulgate an Ordinance in the file.
(c) In respect of legislative proposal of Ordinance prepare draft Ordinance with Statement.
(d) The same duties as provided in sub-rule (1)(b) to (1) (1) in respect of Bill referred above, will be applicable for preparation and finalization of draft Ordinance.
(e) If provisions of Ordinance are repugnant to the provisions of Acts enacted
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २६
# Page 27
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
by Parliament, then obtain President's Instructions before promulgation of an Ordinance.
(f) Sent draft Ordinance file to the Governor for promulgation of an Ordinance.
(g) After Governor's signature shall take the signature of Secretary of the Department below the signature of Governor and shall prepare note and send the file to the Law and Judiciary Department for publication of Ordinance in the Official Gazette.
(h) After publication of Ordinance in Official Gazette, check Gazette copies of the Ordinance.
(i) After promulgation of an Ordinance, take signature of the concerned Minister on the motion to lay the Ordinance before both Houses of the State Legislature and send it to the Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat.
(j) The duties provided in sub-rule (1)(m) to (1) (s) in respect of Bill above will be applicable for conversion of an Ordinance into Bill and passing of Bill in the Maharashtra State Legislature.
(3) In case of Subordinate Legislation (Rules, Notifications, etc).
(a) If the Act provides that, it shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, the originating Department shall take necessary steps to issue notification in the Official Gazette to bring into force the provisions of the Act.
(b) As soon as the Act is published in the Official Gazette, or an Ordinance is promulgated, if it is necessary to make rules or issue notifications or orders, etc., under the Act/Ordinance, originating Department shall make such rules or issue notifications or orders, with the approval of the Law and Judiciary Department.
(c) The rules, notifications, etc., are to be made under the Act and which are required to be laid before both Houses of the State Legislature, Administrative Department shall send Gazette copies of the rules, notifications, etc., to the Secretary, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, to lay before both Houses of the State Legislature/Subordinate Legislation Committee.
(d) In case of recruitment rules, follow the procedure prescribed by the General Administration Department.
(e) While forwarding files of rules and notifications to the Law and Judiciary Department, the Originating Department shall follow the procedure prescribed in rules 13 to 22.
(f) Before referring the file to the Law and Judiciary Department, get the approval of Secretary of the Department and, if deemed appropriate by the Secretary of the Departments, from the concerned Minister-in-charge.
(g) If the proposal affects the policy of other Department or on administrative grounds it requires the approval of other Departments; it shall consult the said Departments;
(h) Follow the model of existing rules, notifications or orders while preparing draft rules, notifications or orders;
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २७
# Page 28
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
(i) While forwarding draft rules, notifications, etc., to Law and Judiciary Department, for vetting/scrutiny, always forward two copies of draft in English typed on half margin with double spacing along with the file.
(j) Forward up-to-date copy of the rules, notifications or orders proposed to be amended along with the file for reference.
Note: The above procedure is generally followed in the Law and Judiciary Department for handling of Legislation work (Bills /Ordinances and Subordinate Legislation work). In exceptional circumstances or urgency some steps may be waived.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra,
Digitally signed by SATISH BABAN WAGHOLE SATISH BABAN DN: c=IN, o=GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA, ou-LAW AND JUDICIARY DEPARTMENT,
2.5.4.20=a8a564a8b86f10dd055a40390fac5e201097ebdc6d10d54 485928bc2ca8562f4, postalCode-400032, st=Maharashtra, serialNumber=4C1735DC74D982FD392B01 D4C40FE989C2BOCAA WAGHOLE 52814EA95C856B28E1379DC21, cn=SATISH BABAN WAGHOLE
(Satish Waghole)
Secretary (Legislation) to Government, Law and Judiciary Department.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २८
# Page 29
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
विधिविधानाचे कामकाज (विधेयके / अध्यादेश) आणि दुय्यम विधिविधानचे कामकाज करण्याच्या कार्यपद्धतीचे नियम.
महाराष्ट्र शासन
विधि व न्याय विभाग, विधिविधान शाखा,
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक. एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४,
मंत्रालय, मादाम कामा मार्ग, हुतात्मा राजगुरु चौक, मुंबई-४०० ०३२.
दिनांक ६ नोव्हेंबर २०२३.
शासन निर्णय
प्रस्तावना :
मंत्रालयातील प्रशासकीय विभाग, महाराष्ट्र शासन कामकाज नियमावली प्रमाणे त्यांना नेमून दिलेल्या विषयांनुसार त्या त्या विभागाशी संबंधित असणाऱ्या विविध अधिनियमांची अंमलबजावणी करतात. वैधानिक प्रस्तावांची कायदेशीर व व संविधानिक व्यवहार्यता तपासण्यासाठी आणि विधेयके, अध्यादेश यांचा मसुदा तयार करण्यासाठी आणि अधिसुचना, नियम, आदेश इत्यादी यांची छाननी करण्यासाठी ते विभाग, विधि व न्याय विभागाकडे प्रस्ताव पाठवितात. सर्व विधिविधान आणि दुय्यम विधिविधानाचे प्रस्ताव विधि व न्याय विभागाच्या विधिविधान शाखेकडून तपासून दिले जातात.
२. विधिविधान व दुय्यम विधिविधानामार्फत शासनाची विविध धोरणात्मक उद्दिष्टे साध्य करण्यासाठी विधि व न्याय विभागातील विधिविधान शाखेची महत्वाची भूमिका असते. मंत्रालयीन प्रशासकीय विभाग व राज्य विधानमंडळ यांच्या विधिविधानासंबंधी कामकाजामध्ये दुवा साधण्याचे काम विधिविधान शाखा करते. प्रत्येक विधिविधानाचे काम विविध टप्यांमधून जाते. सभागृहात विधेयक सादर करण्यापूर्वी आणि महाराष्ट्र राज्य विधानमंडळाच्या दोन्ही सभागृहांनी विधेयक संमत केल्यानंतर विधिविधान शाखेच्या अधिकाऱ्यांना विवक्षित कार्यपद्धतीचे अनुसरण करावे लागते. विधिविधान व दुय्यम विधिविधान यांच्या संस्करण प्रक्रियेमध्ये, मंत्रालयीन प्रशासकीय विभागांची देखील महत्त्वाची भूमिका असते आणि त्यांना देखील विवक्षित कार्यपद्धतीचे अनुसरण करावे लागते.
३. विधिविधानाचा व दुय्यम विधि विधानाचा मसुदा तयार करण्यासाठी विशेषज्ञता, अनुभव, कामातील समर्पण आणि प्रशिक्षित व तज्ञ प्रारूपकारांची उपलब्धता या गोष्टींची आवश्यकता असते. विधिविधानाचा मसुदा तयार करण्याचे काम हे, अत्यंत तांत्रिक, क्लिष्ट व प्रदीर्घ वेळ घेणारे स्वरूपाचे असते; म्हणून, त्यासाठी पुरेसा वेळ आवश्यक असतो. कायद्याचे ज्ञान असलेली कोणतीही व्यक्ती, विधिविधानाचा मसुदा तयार करण्याचा प्रत्यक्ष अनुभव असल्याशिवाय सक्षम प्रारूपकार (Draftsman) होऊ शकत नाही. विधिविधानाचा मसुदा तयार करणे हे कायदेविषयक इतर मसुदे तयार करण्याच्या कामापेक्षा पूर्णपणे वेगळे काम आहे.
४. अनेकदा, मंत्रालयीन विभाग, घाईघाईने प्रस्ताव पाठवीत असतात आणि असे प्रस्ताव मोघम / अस्पष्ट स्वरूपाचे असतात. बहुतेक विधिविधानाचे प्रस्ताव अधिवेशन सुरू होण्याच्या अगदी काही दिवस आधी किंवा अधिवेशन सुरू असताना, विधि व न्याय विभागास प्राप्त होतात. अशा प्रकरणांमध्ये, विधिविधान शाखेला प्रस्तावांची सविस्तर तपासणी / छाननी करण्यासाठी पुरेसा वेळ मिळत नाही. विभागातील अधिकाऱ्यांची संख्या देखील फारच कमी असल्यामुळे अशा अल्प कालावधीमध्ये सर्व वैधानिक प्रस्ताव बारकाईने तपासणे व त्या प्रस्तावांचे कामकाज पूर्ण करणे शक्य होत नाही.
पृष्ठ ६० पैकी २९
# Page 30
शासन निर्णय क्रमांक: एलईजी २०२३/बी-५९४
जर मंत्रालयीन विभागांकडून योग्य रीतीने, उचित कार्यपद्धतीचा अवलंब करून व वेळेत विधिविधानाचे प्रस्ताव तयार करण्यात आले नाही तर, विधिविधान शाखेच्या तसेच संबंधित प्रशासकीय विभागांच्या अधिकाऱ्यांचा बराच अनावश्यक वेळ वाया जातो. वैधानिक प्रस्तावांची तपासणी करण्यासाठी आणि त्याचा मसुदा तयार करण्याकरिता विधिविधान शाखेतील अधिकाऱ्यांना खूप कमी वेळ मिळतो. अधिकाऱ्यांना, कमी वेळेमध्ये विधेयकांचे/अध्यादेशांचे मसुदे तयार करावे लागतात, त्यामुळे काही वेळा न्यायालयीन प्रकरणे उद्भवतात. एकदा कायदा झाल्यानंतर, विविध अंमलबजावणी प्राधिकरणे, अधिवक्ते, न्यायालये, नागरिक, इत्यादींकडून त्याचा अन्वयार्थ लावण्यात येतो, त्यामुळे, वैधानिक प्रस्तावांची सविस्तर तपासणी करणे आणि त्यांचा काळजीपूर्वक मसुदा तयार करणे आवश्यक असते आणि त्या प्रयोजनासाठी, सदर प्रस्ताव विधि व न्याय विभागाकडे विहित वेळेत पाठविले पाहिजेत.
५. विद्यमान अधिनियमांमध्ये सुधारणा करण्यासाठी किंवा नवीन कायदा करण्यासाठी, मंत्रालयीन विभागांकडून, अध्यादेश प्रख्यापित करण्यासाठी किंवा महाराष्ट्र राज्य विधानमंडळामध्ये विधेयक सादर करण्यासाठीचे प्रस्ताव विधि व न्याय विभागाकडे पाठविले जातात. अनेकदा असे निदर्शनास आले आहे की, मंत्रालयीन विभागांना, विधिविधानाच्या प्रस्तावांवर व दुय्यम विधिविधानाच्या प्रस्तावांवर कार्यवाही करण्याच्या उचित कार्यपद्धतीविषयी कोणतीही माहिती नसते.
कायदा करून देखील, संबंधीत विभाग कायद्याची अंमलबजावणी करण्यासाठी अधिनियमाच्या तरतूदी अंमलात आणणे, प्राधिकाऱ्यांची नियुक्ती करणे, मंडळे घटित करणे, आवश्यक असलेल्या अधिसूचना काढणे, नियम तयार करणे, विनियम तयार करणे, इत्यादीं गोष्टींची कार्यवाही वेळेत करीत नाहीत. म्हणून, विधिविधानाचे प्रस्ताव व दुय्यम विधिविधानाचे प्रस्ताव यांच्या प्रक्रियेच्या कार्यपद्धतीचे (Legislation procedure) सविस्तर नियम मंत्रालयातील सर्व विभागातील अधिकाऱ्यांच्या व कर्मचाऱ्यांच्या माहितीसाठी निर्गमित करणे आवश्यक आहे. नियम करण्याच्या उद्देश असा आहे की, मंत्रालयीन विभागांचे अधिकारी व कर्मचारी यांना, विधिविधानाची कार्यपद्धती व टप्पे, विधिविधान प्रक्रिया व दुय्यम विधिविधानाचे काम करण्यासंबंधी त्यांची कर्तव्ये व दायित्वे यांची माहिती असणे आवश्यक आहे. प्रस्तावित नियमांमुळे शासकीय धोरणांची गुणवत्तापूर्वक व कालबद्धरीतीने अंमलबजावणी करण्यास मदत होईल.
शासन निर्णय : शासन धोरणांची गुणवत्तापूर्ण व कालबध्दरितीने अंमलबजावणी करण्यासाठी, विधि विधान कामकाज (विधेयक / अध्यादेश) आणि दुय्यम विधि विधान कामकाज हाताळण्याच्या दृष्टीने विधिविधानाचे कामकाज (विधेयके/अध्यादेश) आणि दुय्यम विधिविधानाचे कामकाज करण्यासाठी सोबतच्या जोडपत्रामधील नियम करण्यात येत आहेत.
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37
# Page 38
# Page 39
# Page 40
# Page 41
# Page 42
# Page 43
# Page 44
# Page 45
# Page 46
# Page 47
# Page 48
# Page 49
# Page 50
# Page 51
# Page 52
# Page 53
# Page 54
# Page 55
# Page 56
# Page 57
# Page 58
# Page 59
# Page 60