# Page 1
Implementation of Restructured Weather Based Fruit Insurance Scheme under Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana to the notified fruit crops for Deer and Mango cultivation in the State.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Dairying Development and Fisheries
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
Madam Cama Road, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Vistar Bhawan, Mumbai- 400 032.
The date: June 5, 2020.
Read: 1) Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India, Letter No. 13015/03/2016- Credit 2, Dy. 28/09/2018 2) Government Decision No.Propivio-2019/ Q.No. 01/11-O, d. 12th July, 2019 3) Government Resolution No.Propivio-2019/ P.S. No. 01/11-A, D. 06th August, 2019 (4th August, 2019) Letter from Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India No. 13015/02/2015-Credit-1, Dy. 28th February, 2020) Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India vide letter No. 13017/04/2020-Credit-I, Dy. 22nd April, 2020 6) Government Resolution No.Propivio-2019/ P.S. No. 01/11-A, D. 12th July, 2019 (5th July, 2019): Minutes of the meeting of the State Level Crop Insurance Coordination Committee dated 04/06/2020.
6) Letter from the Commissioner of Agriculture No. Ja. No. Kriya/ Musan/ Puhafpivyo/ 13449/2020, d. 1st June, 2020.
Introduction: Fruit crops play a major role in the rate of growth of agricultural production. The market price of fruits is high.
Farmers will get good returns. However, if the expected yield is not achieved, the loss is huge. Considering this
Providing insurance cover to farmers against climatic hazards will help in maintaining financial stability of farmers.
The scheme is being implemented across the state. On the productivity of the fruit due to various climatic hazards
As a result, the production has been reduced to a large extent. Farmers not getting desired yield
You have to face the crisis. Considering all these factors, as a solution to get effective compensation to the farmers
Implementation of restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme was under consideration of the government. Restructured weather-based crop insurance
Scheme Mrig Bahara covers 6 fruit crops viz. Orange, Pomegranate, Chikoo, Guava and Lemon in 18 districts and Ambia Bahara
Revenue Boards in 23 districts for 8 crops viz., Orange, Cashew, Pomegranate, Mango, Banana, Grape and Strawberry on pilot basis
This component is proposed to be implemented.
Government Decision: Restructured Weather Based Fruit Insurance Scheme under Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana for the year 2020-21, 2021-22 and
For the three years 2022-23, Mrig Bahara has been allocated for 6 fruit crops namely Orange, Pomegranate, Pomegranate, Chikoo, Guava and Lemon and Ambia Bahara has been allocated for 6 crops.
The government has decided to implement this rule for 8 fruit crops- orange, melon, cashew, pomegranate, mango, banana, grape and strawberry on an experimental basis.
# Page 2
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ P.No. 13/10-A
The decision has been approved. The scheme is proposed to be implemented over a period of three years i.e. 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23
In the revenue circles of the taluks in the districts to be implemented according to the climate risk specified in the letter-2
It's coming Insurance Companies implementing the Scheme for the notified insurance sector units mentioned in Annexure-I
Weather data and co-sheet recorded at the notified Reference Meteorological Centre commissioned under Project MahaVedha
- Compensation to the farmers through the concerned insurance company by combining the crop-wise criteria mentioned in Section 2
The government will not be responsible for any loss.
Objectives of the scheme: 1. To provide insurance cover to the farmers in case of loss of fruit crops due to natural calamities and adverse climatic conditions.
2. Maintaining financial stability of farmers even in the most difficult situation of crop loss.
To encourage farmers to use innovative and improved machinery technology and materials.
4. To ensure continuity of credit flow to agriculture sector so as to achieve the objectives of food security, crop diversification and accelerated growth and competitiveness of agriculture sector besides protecting the farmers from production risks.
Salient features of the scheme: 1. The scheme will be for notified fruit growers in the areas notified under this Order.
The restructured Weather Based Fruit Insurance Scheme from 2020-21 onwards is optional for borrower as well as non-borrower farmers for notified crops in notified areas.
3. Farmers cultivating on lease or in addition to the account holders for the notified fruit crops in the notified area are eligible to participate in the scheme.
Under this scheme, insurance premium will be charged at a realistic rate and the insurance premium paid by farmers has been limited to 5 percent to reduce the burden of insurance premium on farmers.
5. In order to enable maximum number of farmers to avail the benefit of the scheme, within the limit of land holding, one farmer will be entitled to 4% of the notified fruit crop. Registration of insurance is allowed up to the limit of the area.
6. One can apply for insurance cover for one of the notified fruit crops for a single season of Deer or Mango in a single area in a year. (e. g. Orange, Pomegranate, Pomegranate) 7. The cover will be applicable only for productive orchards. The insurance cover will be terminated if the verification shows that the insurance cover has been registered for the plantation of orchards below this age.
The following are the effective production ages:
A. No. of notified fruit crop production age*
1 Peru 3.
2 Chicks 5
3 oranges 3
The 4th 3
Pomegranate
6 lemons 4.
7 Grapes 2.
The 8th 5
9 Cashews 5
2
# Page 3
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
3) The risks involved in the project.
The notified crops, type of insurance cover (weather hazards), duration of insurance cover, amount of cover, trigger and amount of compensation will be as mentioned in Annexure-II.
The notified crops for the three years 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23, including climatic hazards and the period of insurance cover have been prescribed as follows and the insured farmers will be compensated in case the specified climatic hazards are applicable.
Climate risks and insurance coverage period.
Amount of Insurance Coverage Period 1) Deficit Rainfall 15 June to 15 July
9 oranges 80,000 2) Volume of rainfall 16 July to 15 August
Rainfall from July 1 to July 31
Monsoon (August 1 to August 31)
More than 3 Guava Rainfall 15th June to 31st August 60,000 30 4 Chickoo Excessive Humidity and Excess Rainfall 01st July to 30th September 60,000 5 Pomegranate Excessive Rainfall and Excess Humidity 15th July to 15th December 1,30,000 1) Less Rainfall 15th June to 15th July 70,000 6 am Lemon 2) Volume of Rainfall 16th July to 15th August
Fruit-Based Climate Risks and Insurance Coverage Period in Ambia Bahar
Amount of Insurance Coverage Period 1) Untimely rain from 01st December to 31st December
Low Temperature 16 January to 28 February
80,000 1 orange 3) High temperature 01 March to 31 March 4) High temperature 01 April to 31 May
Hailstorm 01 January to 30 April 26,667 1) Unseasonal rain 01 November to 31 December
2) High Temperature 1st March to 31st March 80,000 2nd Monsoon 3) High Rainfall 15th August to 15th September
Hailstorm 01 January to 30 April 26,667 1) High temperature 01 January to 15 March
3 Pomegranate 2) Excessive rainfall and humidity 1st July to 31st July 1,30,000 4) Hailstorm 1st January to 30th April 43,333 1) Unseasonal rainfall 1st December to 31st March
1,00,000 4 Cashews 2) Low Temperature 01 Dec to 28 Feb 3) Hailstorm 01 Jan to 30 Apr 33,333 1) Low Temperature 01 Nov to 28 Feb
Banana 2) Wind speed from 01 Feb to 30 Jun 1,40,000 3) High temperature from 01 Mar to 31 May
3
# Page 4
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
Hailstorm 01 January to 30 April 46,667 1) Unseasonal rain 16 October to 31 March
6 Grapes 2) Daily low temperature from 01st December to 28th February 3,20,000 3) Hailstorm 01st January to 30th April 1,06,667 1) Unseasonal rain 01st December to 15th May
Mango 2) Low Temperature 01 Jan to 15 Mar 1,40,000 (Konkan) 3) High Temperature 01 Mar to 15 May 4) Hailstorm 01 Feb to 31 May 46,667 7 1) Unseasonal Rainfall 01 Jan to 31 May
Mango (Other 2) Low Temperature 01 Jan to 28 Feb 1,40,000 Districts (3) High Temperature 01 Mar to 31 Mar
Hailstorm 01 Feb 2021 to 31 May 2021 46,667 1) Unseasonal rain and relative humidity 15 Oct to 30 Nov
Unseasonal rain, relative humidity and high from February 1 to April 30
Strawberry Temperature 2,00,000 3) Low Temperature 01 Dec to 31 Mar
4) Hailstorm from January 1 to April 30 66,667
4) Insurance premium rate and insurance premium subsidy, under this scheme, the insurance premium rate will be charged at a realistic rate. However, the farmers will have to pay 5% of the crop-wise sum insured per hectare or the amount as premium, whichever is lower.
Under this scheme, the difference between the crop-wise premium per hectare and the actual premium to be paid by the farmers will be considered as the rate of normal premium subsidy. revised guidelines of the Central Government. Limits on Central share of premium subsidy will be applicable as on February 28, 2020. The State Government's premium subsidy to the insurance companies will be paid through the Agriculture Insurance Company of India (AIC) in various stages as per the procedure prescribed by the Central Government under the guidelines of the scheme. The subsidy amount will be paid through Public Finance Management System (PFMS) or PFMS linked system as per the information received from National Crop Insurance Portal.
5. Crop insurance cover and premium to be paid by farmers: Under the Restructured Weather Based Fruit Insurance Scheme, the crop-wise lending rates for the year 2020-21 in the State have been fixed to be subscribed as the sum insured and the amount insured will be retained for the next two years.
The details of district wise, crop wise insurance cover amount, insurance premium rate, insurance premium subsidy etc. in District Groups (Cluster) No. 1, 3, 4, 5 are enclosed in Annexure-3. For farmers participating in the Ambia season, participation in the climate risk of hailstorm will be voluntary and additional insurance premium will be paid for this.
6) Insurance Sector Component: The scheme is being implemented in the revenue circles having a total area of 20 hectares and above under notified fruit crops in the state. According to the information received from the concerned district superintending agricultural officers, such revenue boards have been included in the government decision.
8
# Page 5
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
The scheme will be implemented in the respective district groups by the following insurance companies in the three years of 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23.
Name and address of the insurance company
Group No.
1 Ahmednagar, Amravati, HDFC ERGO General Insurance Co. Ltd.
Sindhudurg, Nashik, Washim, 1st Floor, HDFC House, 165-166 Backbay Reclamation, H.T. Parekh Yavatmal Marg, Churchgate, Mumbai- 400020 3 Satara, Parbhani, Jalna, Customer Service No. : 022-62346234 Latur, Kolhapur Phone No. 022- 6638 3600 E-mail: shailesh. thakur@hdfcergo. com
shekhar.kapale@hdfcergo.com
4 Raigad, Buldhana, Jalgaon, Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Co. Ltd.
Nanded, Pune, Osmanabad Bajaj Alliance House, Airport Road, Yerawada, Pune-411006 Toll Free No. : 18002095858
Telephone No. 020-6602 6666
Email:- pramod. patil01@bajajallianz. co. in
anupam.shrey@bajajallianz.co.in
5 Dhule, Palghar, Solapur, Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limited, Ratnagiri, Nagpur, Nandurbar Mumbai Regional Office, Stock Exchange Towers, 20th Floor, Dalal Street, Fort Mumbai-400023
Toll Free No. : 1800116515
Telephone No. 022-61710912
Email: mhwbcis@aicofindia. com
Orders will be issued separately for the implementation of the scheme for a total of 7 districts (Beed, Aurangabad, Akola, Sangli, Wardha, Thane and Hingoli) included in District Group No. 2 of the state.
8) Schedule of the scheme The deadline for submission of insurance proposals for both borrower and non-borrower farmers will be the same. As per the guidelines of the Central Government, the deadline for submission of insurance proposals by the borrower/ non-loanee farmers to the bank and submission of proposals of the borrower/ borrower farmers by the bank to the respective insurance company has been fixed as follows.
A.No. Details Deer Bahar Ambia Bahar 15 Grapes
Farmers (Borrowers and Non-Borrowers) October 30, 2021
Submission of application for participation in the scheme/ insurance premium 31 installment amount Loanee or non-loanee Banana October 1' Primary Cooperative Orange from the bank account of the farmers
Institute/ Bank/ Your Government Service Centre/ Insurance 20th June* (MRIG 2020) Cashew 30th November Reduction by Representative/ Farmers 14th June (MRIG 2021 and last date to apply online. 2022) Mango (Konkan) Lemon
5
# Page 6
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
June 30th (Other)
District (December 31)
The 14th of July
98 strawberries
October The last date for transfer of insurance premium amount of farmers (borrowers and non-borrowers) electronically to the concerned insurance company and submission of consolidated declaration and insurance proposal to the concerned insurance company from the cooperative bank branch 15 days after the last date of participation of farmers in the merchant bank/ rural bank/ district central scheme and registration of each farmer participating in the scheme on the website of the crop insurance scheme (PMFBY portal).
The last date for submission of the farmer's declaration of insurance, transfer of insurance premium amount electronically to the insurance company and information about the farmer's participation on the website of the Crop Insurance Scheme (PMFBY Portal) within two days from the date of receipt of application for farmer participation and insurance premium.
4 Farmers participation information on website of crop insurance scheme for loanee farmers within 15 days after the last date of acceptance/ rejection of registration.
Last date for submission of application B. Within 30 days after the last date of online registration of crop insurance scheme for non-loanee farmers.
Within 7 days from the date of notification by your Government Service Centre/ Bank/ Insurance Insurance Company.
5 Reply to rectify an error in the insurance proposal.
The insurance company should accept the revised proposal within 6 to 7 days from the date of rectification of the error in the proposal by the centre/ bank/ insurance representative.
The bank/ insurance company should provide the insured farmer with 19 folios within 7 days from the date of acceptance of the information on the portal by the insurance company.
The insurance companies shall notify the Crop Insurance Scheme within 60 days from the last date of the farmer's participation in the scheme (after payment of insurance premium) at the venue (PMFBY portal).
The last date for the approval of the information on the participation of the farmer in the payment of compensation. 3 weeks after the end of the climatic risk of the relevant fruit and the receipt of insurance premium 9 grants
# Page 7
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
9) Taking criminal action in case of bogus crop insurance: The survey number and area for which the crop insurance has been taken out. If the name of the farmer is not found on the 7/12 line of the area, bogus cases of crop insurance on the basis of bogus 7/12 and crop insurance records, then the responsibility of taking legal action against the culprits in such cases will be of the concerned insurance company as per the guidance of the District Control Committee. Also, action should be taken against the Tahsildar for filing separate cases through the Revenue Department regarding the attempt to defraud the government by manipulating the revenue documents.
10) Method of Determination of Compensation: The method of determination of compensation shall be as follows and as indicated in Annexure-II.
Under the restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme, the insurance companies will be responsible for paying the entire amount of compensation to the farmers as per the terms of the agreement. The insurance companies will be responsible for paying the compensation within the stipulated time. The government will not be responsible for any loss.
It shall be the responsibility of the concerned banks/ financial institutions to submit the insurance proposal of the farmers along with the insurance premium in the prescribed format and within the prescribed time to the insurance companies through online mode and in case of any wrong information is provided in the case of the farmers' insurance proposal, the liability for compensation in case of such proposal shall be borne by the concerned banks/ financial institutions.
3. The rate of trigger and payment for each notified fruit has been fixed as per the guidelines of the Central Government. Accordingly, the sum insured at the prescribed rate (as per Letter of Association 2) shall be payable mutually by the respective insurance company.
All banks are required to upload the list of insured farmers on the crop insurance portal within the stipulated time.
The Reference Meteorological Centre shall be the weather station established by the State Government under the MahaVedha Project.
6. State Government and Skymet Weather Services Ltd. As per the terms and conditions of the agreement, Skymet Weather Services Ltd. It will be mandatory for the insurance company to take it from the institution.
7. The insurance company concerned shall use the weather data recorded at the notified Reference Meteorological Centre (RMC) functioning under the Mega Warming Project for the notified crops and the notified insurance area units mentioned in Annexure-I in the revenue circles of the district and taluk selected for the purpose for determining the insurance amount payable.
If the data is not received for any reason by the Reference Meteorological Centre in that Revenue Circle, the data of the Meteorological Centre established under the Mega Project in the nearest Revenue Circle for that period shall be taken into account. In case of non-availability of data of weather stations set up under the MahaVedha project in an exceptional situation, the insurance amount will be decided after taking into account the data of the alternative weather stations/ agricultural universities/ Krishi Vigyan Kendras of the state government. Insurance companies will be responsible for collecting this data.
The list of alternative weather stations will be made available separately from the Commissioner of Agriculture.
Procedure for payment of compensation to farmers: 1. Insurance companies are required to reimburse the farmers insurance premium received by them and the advance insurance premium received from the Government (1st installment) to the extent of the claim without waiting for the payment of the final insurance premium (2nd installment). As per Section 64B of the Insurance Act, the insurance premium received for the insurance sector in the affected area is to be paid by the insurance company in proportion to the premium received for compensation in such cases, using the farmer's share and the advance insurance premium (first installment) paid by the state government.
# Page 8
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
The compensation for the farmers participating in the scheme through the financial institution will be directly credited to the bank account of the farmer through the insurance company. The compensation will be reported to the banks by the insurance company.
The insurance company will be required to publish information about the compensation on the website.
Grievances of the farmers and other stakeholders involved in the insurance scheme must be resolved by the insurance company without delay.
In case of claims for insurance compensation in dispute for any reason, the cases shall be referred to the State Level Coordination Committee/ State Level Technical Advisory Committee after a period of not more than one month from the date of payment of compensation and thereafter to the Technical Advisory Committee under the Ministry of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Government of India for consideration and decision.
State Level Co-ordination Committee: The State Level Co-ordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) will be constituted under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary. The composition and functions of the Committee shall be as follows:
Chief Secretary: Chairman 2. Additional Chief Secretary (Finance): Member 3. Additional Chief Secretary (Planning): Member 4. Additional Chief Secretary (Agriculture): Member 5. Principal Secretary (Revenue): Member 6. Principal Secretary (Cooperation): Member 7. Commissioner (Agriculture), Maharashtra State: Member 8. Commissioner and Registrar, Cooperation, Maharashtra State: Member 9. Representative of Insurance Company: Member
Director (Directorate of Finance and Statistics, Mumbai): Member 11. Representative of Reserve Bank of India: Member 12. Representative of Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank: Member 13. Representative of NABARD: Member
Representative of State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC): Member 15. Maharashtra Sudur Survekshan Sub Plan Centre Nagpur (MRSAC): Member 16. Representative of India Meteorological Department (IMD): Member 17. Skymet Weather Services Ltd. Deputy Secretary (Agriculture), Government of Maharashtra: Member Secretary Functions of State Level Crop Insurance Coordination Committee: 1. Monitoring the implementation of the scheme.
(ii) To decide on the areas and crops to be notified at the time of each sale taking into account the productive area under the crop, to determine the district groups, to determine the risk level, to determine the amount of insurance cover, to take action on the selection of operational mechanism, etc.
3.Take decisions after due deliberation in respect of various difficulties faced in the implementation of the scheme and to correspond with the Central Government, if necessary.
# Page 9
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FATHIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
Control of the program:
At the state level, the scheme will be regulated by the Commissioner of Agriculture through the State Level Crop Insurance Scheme Coordination Committee. The Commissioner (Agriculture) will monitor the scheme with the help of district level committees and field machinery to ensure that maximum farmers get the benefit of the scheme.
District Level Review Committee: The following committees are being constituted at the district level.
District Collector: 2. General Manager, District Central Co-operative Bank: 3. Manager, Lead Bank: 4. Agriculture Development Officer District Council: 5. District Superintendent Agriculture Officer: 5. The Committee shall submit a detailed report to the implementing agency (concerned insurance company) every fortnight on crop loss assessment etc. Appointment of mechanism for conducting panchnamas at individual level, beneficiary verification etc. The committee will be responsible for the successful implementation of the plan.
Similarly, the district. The implementation of the scheme will be reviewed at the district level under the chairmanship of the Chief Minister.
14) Action to be taken on complaints received from farmers under the scheme: In the case of the restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme, complaints are received from farmers and public representatives regarding non-receipt/ non-receipt of compensation, non-response from the insurance company, non-receipt of crop panchnama from the insurance company on time, non-acceptance of applications of farmers by banks, errors/ delays by banks while submitting information to the insurance company, non-payment of beneficiaries by banks within the prescribed time even after receiving the amount through the insurance company.
Complaints received by the Agriculture Department are being attended to promptly. Accordingly, various complaints received should be redressed through committees at the Taluk level, District level, Division level, and State level respectively. For this purpose, the Government had earlier issued Government Resolution No. 1/ 11-O, D. July 12, 2019 and d. The following Committees are being constituted at Taluka, District, Block and State level, taking into consideration the suggestions given as on 06.08.2019:
Taluk level committee
1) Tehsildar: 2) Block Development Officer, Zila Parishad: 3) Concerned Circle Agriculture Officer: 4) Farmer Representative (2): 5) Taluk Level Representative of the Lead Bank: 6) District Central Cooperative Bank Representative: 7) Representative of the concerned Insurance Company: 8) Representative of the Own Government Service Centre Operators (2): 9) Taluk Agriculture Officer: Member Secretary The duties and responsibilities to be performed by the Taluk Level Committee: 1) To take action under the guidelines of the scheme for redressal of the grievances of the farmers received in connection with the implementation of the scheme.
2) To take action on complaints received regarding the scheme.
9
# Page 10
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
3) To keep a control on the work of your government service center at the taluk level regarding the scheme.
4) To regulate the participation in the scheme by all nationalized/ private/ cooperative bank branches in the taluk.
5) Verify the complaints regarding registration and make recommendations to the department-level district-level committee as needed.
the District Level Committee
(a) The Chairman:
(2) The District Agriculture Officer:
(3) The representative of the insurance company
District Lead Bank Officer: Member.
District Deputy Manager, NABARD: Member
Member of the Board of Directors (Agricultural University/ Research Institute):
Farmers' representatives (maximum 3):
8) Deputy Director of Agriculture, District Superintendent Agriculture Officer Office: Member Secretary
the Divisional Commissioner Level Committee
(a) The Chairman of the Board:
(2) The District Collector of the concerned district: Member
= 3) Representative of the insurance company: Member 4) Scientist of the Agricultural University: Member
Farmers' representatives (maximum of 2): Member
Joint Director of Agriculture: Member Secretary
the State Level Committee
Secretary/ Principal Secretary (Agriculture):
The Commissioner of Agriculture: Member
(a) The Co-operative Commissioner: Member
Coordinator, State Level Bankers Committee: Member
Chief General Manager, NABARD: Member
Farmers' representatives (maximum of 2): Member
Members of the Legislative Assembly (from the department receiving the complaint) (maximum 2):
(a) Deputy Secretary: Member Secretary
The Committee may appoint experts from Universities/ Meteorology Departments/ Research Institutions/ Commodity Boards/ Maharashtra State Remote Sensing Utility Centre/ State Technical Support Unit as per requirement.
The complaints should be redressed by the district level committee. If the complaints made to the committees at the district level are not resolved properly, the divisional level committee should resolve those complaints. Complaints not resolved at the divisional level should be submitted to the State Level Committee. Complaints of serious nature, pertaining to more than one district and extent of damage to the tune of Rs.
Complaints of more than Rs 25 lakh will be submitted to the state level committee. The state level committee will resolve the issue immediately after receiving the complaint. The decision of the committee will be binding on all parties.
The District Superintending Agriculture Officer of the concerned district is being authorized to look into the claims in court cases regarding the restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme, to take complete action on behalf of the government and to take complete action on the complaint being filed in the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Tribunal.
10
# Page 11
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
The above committees should take action under the guidelines to redress the grievances of the farmers received in connection with the implementation of the scheme at the taluka and district levels. If the complaints at the district, divisional level are not resolved as per the guidelines of the scheme, then the matter at the level of Agriculture Commissionerate should be submitted with complete details and feedback by the Divisional Agriculture Joint Director.
Deposit of insurance cases and insurance premiums: The banking system used in the Rashtriya Krishi Bima Yojana and the National Crop Insurance Programme under the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana will continue to be applicable to cooperative banks. Contact the nodal bank authorised by the insurance company. The branches of Commercial Banks/ Regional Rural Banks will continue to function as Nodal Banks. The Regional Offices/ Administrative Offices of Lead Bank and Commercial Banks will take action for sending the guidelines of the scheme to their Subsidiary Banks, coordinate the forwarding of insurance proposals from the bank branch to the insurance company within the prescribed time frame and take action for putting the complete information of insurance on the Crop Insurance Portal. In addition, insurance companies will use insurance agents/ insurance intermediaries to increase the participation of non-loanee farmers in the scheme.
The nodal bank/ bank branch shall submit the declarations/ proposals to the insurance company in the format indicated on the Agriculture Insurance Portal.
(iii) Information about male/ female, bank account number, etc.
Only those farmers whose insurance application details are uploaded on the National Insurance Portal will be eligible for insurance coverage and the insurance premium subsidy of the state and central government will be paid accordingly.
Farmers to be paid:
The scheme has been made optional for the loanee farmers as per the revised guidelines of the Central Government for the farmers who have been sanctioned loans for notified crops and notified areas. The loanee farmer will be required to inform the concerned bank about the non-reduction of insurance premium for the notified crops for which he has taken a loan to opt out of the scheme (Letter of Intent-5) up to seven days before the deadline of registration. The farmers who do not inform the banks about their non-participation in the stipulated time will be considered as participating in the scheme and the insurance premium of these farmers will be deducted from the loan account in the prescribed manner. The bank branch/ primary agricultural credit supply cooperative society sanctioning loan as per the schedule of the scheme shall prepare and submit to the concerned insurance company in the prescribed form the monthly crop-wise, insurance area-wise, insurance premium rate as per the sum insured (through nodal bank). The loan disbursing bank/ Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Co-operative Society will sanction the insurance premium to be paid by the farmers as additional loan amount.
The option of joining/ not joining the scheme is being worked out for the loanee farmers.
The loanee farmers can decide whether to join the scheme or not. Farmers are expected to give a declaration of non-participation before the season or seven days before the deadline for joining the scheme. If the farmers' declaration is received seven days before the deadline for joining the scheme, the loanee farmers will be excluded from the scheme for the next season.
Farmers can deduct the amount from the bank account from seven days before joining the scheme to the last day. After this, the banks while deciding the final list of the participation of the farmers did not want to participate.
11
# Page 12
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
Eligible loanee farmers who wish to participate, excluding farmers, must be included. The other procedures of the banks regarding the eligible loanee farmers will continue as before.
Announcement regarding joining or not joining the scheme will be made by the farmers in the bank in which the Kisan Credit Card account is held or from which the crop loan has been taken. It is expected to be deposited in the bank branch.
6. Loanee farmers should have separate applications for joining and not joining the scheme.
7) All farmers who do not give a declaration of not participating in the scheme with their own signature will be considered to be mandatory to participate in the scheme.
After the farmers have given a declaration about not participating in the scheme, the farmers are required to receive the receipt of the concerned application along with the signature of the responsible officer of the branch.
A farmer had given a declaration about not joining the scheme in the previous season, but if a declaration has been given about joining the scheme in the current season, then the concerned farmer needs to be registered.
If there is any change in the farmer's Kisan Credit Card account, the concerned farmers are not willing to register their participation in the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana, then the banks will have to give their consent.
It is a prerequisite for a farmer to have a bank account to participate in the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana, PM Kisan, Kisan Credit Card.
A large amount of government funds are provided for the insurance premium subsidy from the central and state government for the scheme. To avoid wastage of this fund, it will be necessary to upload the photo of the fruit garden (Geo Tagging) along with the insurance application from the year 2020-21 on the Vibha portal. Also, the registration of notified fruit crops is being limited to 4 hectares per farmer.
As per the schedule fixed by the State Level Committee, till the last date, the branches of the merchant bank/ Regional Rural Bank/ Nodal Bank (in case of Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Co-operative Society) shall submit the insurance proposal and send it to the concerned insurance company with detailed details, including the amount of crop insurance premium.
Non-loanee farmers (Voluntary) 1. Non-loanee farmers desirous of joining the scheme shall submit their insurance proposal along with the premium amount to the local branch of commercial banks/ Regional Rural Banks/ Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Co-operative Societies/ authorized insurance representative of the insurance company or insurance intermediary.
The farmer participating in the scheme will submit the insurance premium to the branch of the merchant bank/ regional rural bank/ primary agricultural credit supply cooperative society by filling the insurance proposal in the prescribed form. The farmers will have to open a savings bank account. The officers of the bank will help and guide the farmers in filling up the applications and other matters. While accepting the insurance proposal of the farmer, it will be the responsibility of the concerned banks to check the amount covered by him and the applicable insurance premium amount, etc. The branch of the bank shall prepare crop-wise crop insurance proposal/ declaration in the prescribed format and send the same along with the premium amount to the implementing insurance companies within the prescribed time limit.
The agencies approved by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI), the representatives appointed by the insurance company, while accepting the premium from the farmer, will check the relevant land record documents regarding the area under the crop, the amount of insurance cover etc. of the farmer, as well as save a copy of the agreement/ consent letter of the tenant or family farmers in the archive. The authorized agency/ insurance representative will send the amount of the deposited insurance premium and the collected proposal to the insurance company within 7 days. In case of such farmers, they will verify their bank accounts and send the details to the concerned insurance company
12
# Page 13
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
A large amount of government funds are provided for the insurance premium subsidy from the central and state government for the scheme. Also, the registration of notified fruit crops is being limited to 4 hectares per farmer.
Participation of non-loanee farmers in the scheme- Directly through the insurance company: 1. Non-loanee farmers who want to participate in the scheme can participate in the scheme through the crop insurance website or the website of the insurance company authorized by the government. Non-loanee farmers participating in the scheme in the above manner shall have proof of participation in the scheme e.g. It is mandatory to have a receipt of payment of Xerox or insurance premium of the application. If the information entered in the insurance proposal is found to be incorrect, the insurance premium of the farmers will be forfeited and the farmers will not be entitled to compensation.
The insurance company has the right to return the proposal submitted for participation in the restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme within one month of receiving the proposal if it is incomplete/ does not submit the necessary evidence and documents along with the proposal/ if the due insurance premium is not paid. If the insurance company rejects the proposal, the entire amount of the insurance premium will be refunded to the concerned farmer through the insurance company.
All banks are required to ensure that all loans sanctioned for the notified crop are insured within the prescribed period.
All insurance proposals submitted by the Nodal Banks/ Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Co-operative Societies after the prescribed period will be rejected by the insurance company and the liability of all such insurance proposals will be with the respective banks. All the Nodal Banks/ Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Cooperative Societies should ensure that the consolidated report of the farmers participating in the scheme along with the deposit insurance premium is sent to the respective insurance company within the prescribed time frame. If the bank does not submit the insurance proposal to the insurance company within the prescribed time limit, the responsibility will be of the concerned bank.
All branches of banks, all nodal banks, district central cooperative banks, list of farmers (borrowers non-borrowers) participating in the scheme and other necessary information such as the full name of the farmer, bank account number, village name, small.
The small landholders will take the information of such category, SC/ ST, male/ female category, insurance protected area, name of the crop, deposit insurance premium, government subsidy, etc. in soft copy from the concerned primary agricultural credit supply cooperative society/ bank branch and will take action to send the information to the concerned insurance company within 15 days after the expiry of the deadline and publish it on the website of the crop insurance scheme.
6. The information of non-loanee farmers will be obtained by the insurance companies from the intermediary agencies in the prescribed form. It is the responsibility of the concerned insurance company to obtain the information of the farmers (borrowers and non-borrowers) participating in the scheme through banks/ financial institutions, insurance intermediaries and the concerned insurance company will also assist the bank in publishing the information on the website of the crop insurance scheme.
All the insurance companies will verify the information of the farmers participating in the scheme received from them and will publish the final insurance premium of the subsidy given by the government under the scheme on the website of the insurance company one month before the receipt of the premium.
Publicity, publicity and training: The scheme needs to be given adequate publicity at the field level. The services of audio visual medium, agricultural extension officers of the state should be utilized for this. It is also necessary to provide training to the persons doing the work of collecting insurance premiums, scrutinizing insurance cases, etc. The implementing agency should make arrangements for this.
13
# Page 14
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
Information about the scheme should be distributed at the regional level. A documentary film showing the salient features of the scheme should be prepared by the insurance company concerned and shown to as many farmers as possible.
The insurance company concerned should prepare a special action plan for creating awareness and training among the farmers regarding the scheme.
The insurance company should spend 0.5 percent of the total premium amount on the promotion and publicity of the scheme at the regional level and submit the details of the expenditure to the state and central government at the end of the season. If the premium amount is less than 0.5 per cent of the total premium amount, the insurer will have to deposit the difference amount in the Central Government's" Technology Fund" within three months from the last date of registration.
Roles and responsibilities of various agencies involved in the scheme: The restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme will involve the participation of various departments of the Central Government, State Governments and various agencies i. e., Government and Private Insurance Companies and various financial institutions. For the smooth and effective implementation of the restructured climate based crop insurance scheme, it is mandatory for every institution to perform the work assigned to them in the best possible manner.
Roles and Responsibilities of the Central Government: The Central Government will issue guidelines from time to time for the effective implementation of the restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme. Also, coordination and assistance will be provided to the state government for public awareness/ publicity.
Guidelines will be issued by the Central Government to the financial institutions/ banks for the fulfillment of the financial aspects of the Weather Based Fruit Insurance Scheme restructured by the Reserve Bank of India and NABARD.
Management of" National Crop Insurance Portal."
Establishment of a Technical Support Unit/ Central Project Management Cell and provision of necessary services.
Establishment/ reconstitution of the Technical Advisory Committee.
Payment of 50% of the Central Government share of 80% of the premium amount of the previous season to the insurance companies within 15 days after the last date of crop insurance registration as advance premium amount.
7. Payment of remaining premium within 15 days as soon as district wise data of farmer participation is finalized on National Crop Insurance Portal.
8. Monitoring and review of the implementation of the restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme and advise the insurance company on crop insurance premium and other necessary aspects. From time to time, the work of insurance companies will be reviewed and suggestions will be given to improve it if needed.
Training/ workshops will be conducted for State Governments and other stakeholders.
10. Guidance on the provisions of the scheme and to decide on any difficulties while determining the compensation.
To provide support, guidance and resources for the use of technology required for bringing transparency, good governance in the implementation of the scheme and ensuring timely payment of insurance compensation to the farmers.
(b) Roles and Responsibilities of the State Government The State Government shall perform the following functions for the effective implementation of the scheme:
After the notification of the scheme is issued, the necessary information in the notification should be published on the website of the crop insurance scheme with the help of the insurance company selected for the implementation of the scheme by the state government.
Necessary action should be taken to ensure compensation within the prescribed time frame and use of modern technology for effective implementation of the scheme.
3. Provide necessary directions to all the agencies/ institutions/ government departments/ committees involved in the implementation of the scheme.
14
# Page 15
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
Payment of 50% of the Central Government's share of 80% of the premium amount of the previous season as advance premium to the insurance companies within 15 days after the last date of registration of crop insurance in compliance with General Financial Rules (GFR)/ case guidelines.
Payment of remaining premium within 15 days as soon as the district-wise data of farmer participation is finalized on the National Crop Insurance Portal.
The state government is required to pay the insurance premium subsidy for deer and ambia bahar before March 31 and September 30 of the next year, respectively. If the State Government pays the State Share Insurance premium subsidy amount more than 3 months after the due date, the State Government will have to pay penalty at the rate of 12% per annum for the delay period.
The State Government will try to use Public Financial Management System (PFMS)/ PFMS Linked System as far as possible for disbursement of State share of insurance premium to the companies.
8. To increase the participation of farmers, especially non-loanee farmers, in the restructured weather-based Fruit Insurance Scheme, massive awareness and publicity will be done through the Agriculture and other related departments of the State Government.
At least 3% of the total allocation for the scheme should be provided by the state government for administrative expenses, use of modern technology, state technical support unit, travel expenses and incidental expenses.
Roles and Responsibilities of an Insurance Company: The insurance company shall act as a link between the State Government and other enforcement agencies.
(2) The State Level Crop Insurance Coordination Committee shall address the necessary issues as per the notification.
The insurance company will be responsible for determining the compensation under this scheme and paying the compensation directly to the bank account of the farmer.
4. Determination and payment of compensation as per schedule.
5. Reinsurance to be provided as required.
6. Creation of database of crop yield and climatic factors as well as agricultural insurance.
To review the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana and submit it to the Ministry of Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (Central Government) with necessary suggestions for effective implementation.
Before the start of the season, the insurance company concerned must declare in writing the appointment of private insurance representatives.
9. Payment of service charges to enforcement agencies.
Insurance companies should take the initiative to implement pilot projects using new technologies for effective implementation of the scheme in a transparent manner.
To make efforts to create awareness and publicize the information of the scheme to the farmers with a view to increase the participation of loanee and non-loanee farmers by at least 10%, to provide necessary manpower and resources for this purpose and to coordinate with the State Government and other institutions for public awareness and publicity.
To provide monthly progress reports/ statistics and other related information as requested by the Central and State Governments.
Collection and dissemination of information of insured farmers/ beneficiaries by authorized banks and their representatives on the website.
The various grievances related to the scheme should be redressed within the prescribed time frame fixed by the Insurance Regulatory Authority and a toll free number based on docket facility should be made available under the control of Agriculture Insurance Company of India to register the grievances of the farmers.
15. Intermediaries should not be appointed to ensure that the insurance company itself takes action for the participation of the loanee farmers.
15
# Page 16
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
16. The district headquarters telephone office is required to be established for the district for which the insurance company has been appointed. Also, agriculture graduate representatives should be appointed in the respective district offices. At least one representative should be appointed at the taluk level in the district where the work has been assigned. The details of this office and representative should be made available on the Agriculture Insurance website. Where the insurance company could not find a place to open the office due to some technical reasons, the representative of the insurance company will be provided a place in the office of the District/ Taluk Agriculture Officer. The office will function as' Crop Insurance Office."
17. It will be mandatory to appoint a Loss Accuser to determine the compensation as per the guidelines of the Central Government.
It will be the responsibility of the insurance companies to obtain the details of insurance proposals uploaded on the portal by the nodal banks/ merchant banks/ Gramin Banks and the deposit of insurance premium online.
The insurance company should use modern technology, remote sensing, satellite images, drones, etc. to determine the details of the area of the notified crop in the notified area and the compensation.
20. For effective implementation of the restructured weather based Fruit Crop Insurance Scheme, after receiving insurance proposal from Nodal Banks/ District Central Co-operative Banks, similarly, after receiving the insurance premium subsidy from the Government, the insurance company is required to fix the compensation amount and pay it to the farmers within 3 weeks. Otherwise, the insurance company will have to pay the amount of compensation to the beneficiary farmers along with a late fee at the rate of 12 percent.
21. Insurance companies should increase the capacity of toll free numbers to facilitate farmers to contact the toll free numbers issued during the season and ensure that the toll free numbers remain functional without any complaints. Similarly, if the toll-free number is not working properly, then the information about the crop loss received by the farmers through phone, letter, email.
Further action will have to be taken by the concerned insurance company after taking note of the complaints as per the guidelines of the scheme.
The insurance companies will help these financial institutions to fill the details of the participating farmers on the crop insurance portal. Apart from this, no other format/ website/ facility etc. can be used by the insurance companies to collect the information of the farmers participating in the scheme.
The insurance company is obliged to use modern technology in coordination with the state government to determine the details of the area of the notified crops and compensation in the notified area through the insurance company. The State Government will provide necessary assistance like appointment of suitable agency for remote sensing, satellite imaging, use of drones etc. while determining the compensation through the insurance company. This is necessary for effective control and ground toothedness. Insurance companies are expected to take an active part in the use of technology.
It shall be the responsibility of the insurer, which has fixed the lowest premium rate in the segment, to increase the proportion of non-loanee farmers participating in the restructured weather-based Fruit Crop Insurance Scheme by at least 10%.
Insurance companies are required to create adequate and committed manpower for advertising the scheme, creating awareness and capacity development. The detailed plan needs to be submitted by the company to the central and state governments before the start of the season.
If the application of the loanee and non-loanee farmers received by the insurance companies is incomplete, a copy of the required certificate has not been attached, Aadhaar number or Aadhaar registration number/ delivery or insurance premium has not been paid, then the insurance companies will have the right to accept or reject the application within 15 days or 1 month, respectively. If the claim is rejected, the insurance company will refund the entire premium paid by the farmer.
Responsibilities of Banks/ Financial Institutions: All banks and institutions which are regulated by the Reserve Bank of India and National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) and provide seasonal crop loans to farmers will be treated as financial institutions under the scheme.
16
# Page 17
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
Under the Restructured Weather Based Fruit Crop Insurance Scheme, the District Central Co-operative Bank in each district will act as the nodal bank in case of co-operative banks and each branch of the said bank will act as the nodal bank in case of commercial banks and rural banks.
The Divisional/ Administrative Offices of Commercial Banks and Gramin Banks, District Central Co-operative Banks (Nodal Banks) in each district shall ensure compliance of all guidelines, Government decisions, etc. received by them in pursuance of the Scheme.
It must be sent to all branches under their control.
The Divisional/ Administrative Offices of Commercial Banks and Gramin Banks, District Central Co-operative Banks (Nodal Banks) in each district should instruct all the banks under them to sanction additional loans for the insured farmers while sanctioning loans for the loanee farmers.
All banks are required to provide proper guidance and assistance to non-loanee farmers who wish to participate in the scheme. For example, opening bank accounts of farmers, helping them file insurance proposals by taking appropriate insurance premiums and updating their reports.
It is mandatory for all banks/ financial institutions to upload the details of the applicant farmers electronically on the National Crop Insurance Portal. For this, all banks/ financial institutions need to have CBS integration so that instant exchange of information is possible.
All the nodal banks are required to submit the deposit insurance premium amount, insurance proposal and collateral information of the loanee and non-loanee farmers separately to the respective insurance company within the stipulated time.
The option of joining/ not joining the scheme is being worked out for the loanee farmers.
The loanee farmers can decide whether to join the scheme or not. Farmers are expected to give a declaration of non-participation before the season or seven days before the deadline for joining the scheme. If the farmers' declaration is received seven days before the deadline for joining the scheme, the loanee farmers will be excluded from the participation of the scheme for the next season.
Farmers can deduct the amount from the bank account from seven days before joining the scheme till the last day. After this, the banks while finalizing the list of farmer participation must include the farmers who do not want to participate and the eligible loanee farmers who want to participate.
The other procedures of the banks regarding the eligible loanee farmers will continue as before.
All lead banks/ nodal banks shall ensure that all loans and borrowers taken for notified crops in their jurisdiction are insured under the Farmers' Credit Scheme and no borrower farmer is left out of the insurance cover and the banks shall issue instructions in this regard to all the branches under their jurisdiction. If due to the error/ delay/ negligence of the concerned bank, some of the loanee farmers do not get the insurance cover and the compensation is sanctioned during the season, then the responsibility of payment of sanctioned compensation to all the farmers who are not covered by the insurance will be solely of that bank/ branch.
12. The declarations/ proposals and insurance premiums shall be rejected immediately if they are submitted to the insurance company by the bank/ primary agricultural credit supply agency after the prescribed due date and the concerned bank shall be responsible for any such declarations. Accordingly, the facility of filing applications on the National Crop Insurance Portal will be closed after the prescribed deadline.
However, if any grievances are raised in this regard, they will be redressed as per the procedure of the prescribed Grievance Redressal Committee.
13. The bank branch/ Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Co-operative Society sanctioning loan as per the schedule of the scheme shall prepare and submit to the concerned insurance company in the prescribed form the monthly crop-wise, insurance area-wise, insurance premium rate as per the sum insured (through the nodal bank). The loan disbursing bank/ Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Co-operative Society will sanction the insurance premium to be paid by the farmers as additional loan amount.
All branches of Nodal Banks/ Commercial Banks and Gramin Banks are required to send crop-wise and notified area-wise crop insurance proposals in the prescribed format (separate for non-loanee farmers) along with the premium amount to the concerned insurance company within the stipulated time.
17
# Page 18
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
As per the schedule fixed by the State Level Committee, till the last date, the branches of the merchant bank/ Regional Rural Bank/ Nodal Bank (in case of Primary Agricultural Credit Supply Co-operative Society) shall submit the insurance proposal and send it to the insurance company along with the details, including the amount of crop insurance premium.
All the Nodal Banks/ Commercial Banks/ Gramin Banks are required to upload the details of Farmer-wise Crop Insurance Offer and Deposit of Insurance premium (NEFT/ RTGS/ UTR) online on the National Crop Insurance Portal. Also, all proposals must be sent to the insurance company within the stipulated time.
All banks are required to credit the amount of compensation sanctioned by the concerned insurance company under exceptional circumstances under the scheme to the bank account of the beneficiary farmers within 7 days of receipt.
If a bank does not deposit the compensation amount in the farmers' bank account within the stipulated time, the concerned bank will be obliged to deposit the compensation amount along with interest (prevailing interest rate payable on savings account) in the farmers' account.
Nodal Bank/ Administrative Offices The complete name of the farmer along with the details of farmers participating in the scheme.
The bank account number, name of the village, category of small landholder, Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, category of women farmer, insurance protected area, name of the crop, deposit insurance premium, government subsidy, etc. will be taken in soft copy from the concerned primary agricultural credit supply cooperative society/ bank branch and the information will be sent to the concerned insurance company within 15 days after the expiry of the deadline.
19. The insurance company concerned shall examine the insurance proposal after receiving it from the bank and forward it to the bank. The concerned bank will re-examine the insurance proposal from the documents available with it and if there are any corrections in it, it will be brought to the notice of the insurance company within 15 days, otherwise the insurance proposal sent by the insurance company will be treated as final and no changes in it will be accepted in future.
20. The bank concerned is required to publish the list of farmers who have received compensation on the notice board. Also, the certificate that the compensation amount received has been deposited in the bank account of all the farmers must be sent to the insurance company. Also, the list of farmers eligible for compensation should be published on the crop insurance portal with the help of the insurance company.
All banks will have to make available all documents related to the insurance proposal to the concerned insurance company for inspection as and when required.
22. The Bank shall ensure that no farmer is deprived of the benefit of the scheme If a farmer is deprived of the benefit of the scheme due to the fault of the financial institution, the responsibility of paying the compensation due to that farmer shall rest with the concerned bank.
The bank branch will be responsible for filling the complete application of the farmer. If a farmer is not able to fill the application, then it will be the responsibility of the bank branch to fill the application on behalf of the farmers, so that no farmer who wants to participate in the crop insurance scheme is deprived of crop insurance coverage.
Farmers whose insurance premium due to adverse weather conditions has been credited/ transferred from their bank account within the date of notification of the concerned weather unit will be considered eligible. Therefore, it is mandatory for the banks to pay the insurance premium of the loanee farmer to the insurance company within 15 days from the sanction of the crop loan/ renewal of the Kisan Credit Card, otherwise, the entire responsibility of possible compensation in the case of such farmers will remain with the concerned bank. To avoid such a situation, banks should deposit the insurance premium of the loanee farmer with the insurance company at least one month before the last date of registration of insurance and thereafter, in case of approved loan accounts, the insurance premium should be deposited on a daily basis.
Banks are given a service charge of 4% of the deposit insurance premium. For this, banks should provide all necessary support to non-loanee farmers in submitting insurance proposals.
Banks are required to link the bank account of the farmer with the Aadhaar card while submitting the insurance proposal of the loanee and non-loanee farmers. The concerned bank should check the documents in this regard.
18
# Page 19
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
In case of delay in sending the declarations of insurance by the bank/ nodal bank to the concerned insurance company, the service charge payable to the bank shall be deducted.
Banks while finalizing the list of participating loanee farmers must include eligible loanee farmers who wish to participate, excluding the loanee farmers who do not wish to participate. The other procedures of the banks regarding the eligible loanee farmers will continue as before.
29. The bank is required to prepare and make available to the farmers their bank forms for joining and not joining the loanee farmers.
Banks are obliged to include all those farmers in the scheme who do not give a declaration about not participating in the scheme with their own signature. If the banks do not involve these farmers, the entire responsibility of the compensation to be paid to them will remain with the concerned bank branch.
Banks should help the loanee farmers in filling the application.
32. After the declaration of non-participation of the loanee farmers in the scheme, the receipt in the relevant application must be given to the farmers with the signature of the responsible officer of the branch.
The declaration given by the farmers must be preserved by the banks in physical and digital form. The concerned forms submitted by the farmers can be used as evidence in case of any complaint by the farmers in the scheme in future.
A farmer who had given a declaration of not joining the scheme in the previous season, but has given a declaration of joining the scheme in the current season, the concerned farmer needs to be registered. In case any error is noticed by the bank in this regard, the bank branch will be responsible for the same.
If there is any change in the farmer's Kisan Credit Card account, the banks will have to take consent from the farmers if they are not interested in registering their participation in the Pradhan Mantri Crop Insurance Scheme. In this regard, the banks can include an issue in the application for renewal of Kisan Credit Card, along with a declaration of non-participation in the scheme to be given to the concerned farmer. It will be mandatory for the concerned bank to include the farmer in the scheme until the farmer gives a declaration about not participating in the scheme with his own signature.
Banks will be required to mention on the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana Portal Kisan Credit Card Portal that the farmers have given a declaration about joining or not joining the scheme.
37. If it is found that the bank has wrongly deducted the insurance premium of the farmer and sent it to the insurance company despite the farmer giving a declaration of not participating in the scheme, the bank is required to credit the insurance premium amount back to the farmer's bank account. In such cases, if the insurance company has received the amount of compensation from the insured, then the amount of compensation is to be returned to the insurer within 30 days.
In view of the interest of the banks, it is beneficial for the banks to inform the farmers about the scheme and motivate them to register their participation. The banks will undertake a campaign in this regard and will try to reach out to as many farmers as possible with the help of the insurance company concerned and the agriculture department of the state government.
Banks are required to provide necessary assistance at the bank level to non-loanee farmers for joining the scheme or opening of Kisan Credit Card account.
Banks/ Financial Institutions to provide credit 1. Guide farmers on Restructured Weather Based Fruit Crop Insurance Scheme 2. Help farmers in preparing insurance proposals in prescribed format and compile various documents of loanee and non-loanee farmers.
3) Obtain Aadhaar and mobile number of all the loanee farmers before the commencement of insurance registration.
19
# Page 20
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
4. Collect the information of the loanee and non-loanee farmers in separate forms and submit it to the insurance company in time along with the insurance premium.
Preserve the insurance policy proposal and other necessary documents for scrutiny/ verification to be done by the insurance company or its authorized representatives and district level coordination committee.
The relevant records and records in the office of the Nodal Bank and other banks providing services under it in its jurisdiction should be made available to the insurance company.
7. Keeping records of area and crops of creditworthy and non-creditworthy farmers taking insurance cover.
8.Collect and validate the information of the insurance proposals within 15 days from the last date of uploading the insurance proposals on the portal and within 7 days from the date of requisition by the insurance company.
To deduct the premium of the farmers before the expiry of the insurance registration period and transfer the amount directly to the concerned insurance company through electronic system.
10. Deposit of insurance compensation amount received from insurance company in the account of farmers within 7 days and refund of unpaid amount to the concerned insurance company within 10 working days from the date of receipt of the amount and report the same to the Central and State Government.
In the administrative system, the bank branches are considered as the last service centers. Therefore, it is the responsibility of all the bank branches to register the crop insurance of all the loanee farmers and willing non-loanee farmers.
In case of misrepresentation or misrepresentation, the concerned bank/ bank branch/ primary service institution will be responsible for the consequential insurance claims arising out of such omissions.
(g) Jan Suvidha Kendras- Apni Sarkar Kendras (CSC-SPV) 1. Ensure registration of non-loanee farmers through Jan Suvidha Kendras.
Training of village level staff on crop insurance through portals or respective crop insurance companies working at district level to increase crop insurance participation.
3. Online payment of insurance premium collected from farmers through Jan Suvidha Kendras to the concerned insurance company within three days from the date of receipt from the farmers.
4. Reporting of insurance premiums collected at the Janaushadhi Kendras and the details of farmer participation to the respective insurance companies on a daily basis.
Verification of the details of farmer's participation on the National Crop Insurance Portal and the premium paid to the concerned insurance company within 7 days of the expiry of the insurance registration deadline.
6. Submission of payment of service charge as per the rate of service charge per farmer fixed for the season to the concerned insurance company on or before 10th of the next month.
8. The concerned Seva Kendra will be responsible for errors or omissions in the information of individual farmers filled on the National Crop Insurance Portal and in the documents submitted and will be responsible for the crop insurance claims due to such errors.
9. The Village Level Servitors (VLEs) at the Common Facility Centres shall ensure that the farmers enrolled in the insurance coverage are not deprived of the benefits of the scheme due to any errors, mistakes or adverse events. If the farmers are deprived of the benefits of the scheme due to errors in the service of Village Level Servitors (VLEs) at the public convenience center, then they should submit their report and take administrative and legal action against them.
Village Level Employees (VLEs) at Jan Suvidha Kendras 1. Educate farmers, especially non-loanee farmers, about the scheme and explain the features of the scheme.
Advertisements, publicity materials, banners, posters, leaflets etc. given by the insurance company/ state government for the promotion and publicity of the scheme should be prominently published in the field to reach the farmers.
3. Acceptance of insurance proposal of non-loanee farmers in prescribed form along with necessary documents and fill it online.
4. Deposit of Farmers Insurance premium as per the provisions of the guidelines by the implementing insurance company.
20
# Page 21
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
5. On the National Crop Insurance Portal, the information of the non-loanee farmers along with the mobile number and the correct details along with the necessary documents should be updated and the insurance premium amount should be deposited through the public convenience center within a certain period. Take due care while filing crop insurance proposals of non-loanee farmers and match the attached documents with the proposal.
6. The Village Level Servitors (VLEs) at the Common Facility Centres shall ensure that the farmers enrolled in insurance do not lose out on the benefits of the scheme due to any errors, mistakes or contraindications. If the farmers are deprived of the benefits of the scheme due to the errors and malpractices in the service of Village Level Servitors (VLEs) at the Public Facilitation Center, their report will be submitted and administrative and legal action will be taken against them.
7. Providing post-insurance services to the insured farmers and creation of facilities for crop insurance claims or grievances, if any.
8. Janaushadhi Kendras will upload all the documents required for the insurance proposal at the time of filing the insurance application on behalf of the farmers. Applications without the required documents will not be considered for insurance compensation and the driver of the public convenience center will be responsible for the errors in the documents.
9 Farmers are not required to pay any fee/ charges to the concerned Jansubhagya Kendra/ Special Purpose Vehicle for filing insurance application through Jansubhagya Kendra.
(i) Fake registration receipts are detected in some districts in the implementation of schemes for A. No. 6 and H. Technical measures have been taken to prevent this. In this regard, complaints are also received about cheating from your government center driver.
The cases regarding registration arise due to the filling of incorrect information by the driver of your government center. Thus, it was very difficult to determine the wrongful liability, to consider the compensation and in such cases to determine the liability for compensation. Accordingly, while registering the applications, it is mandatory for the operators of our government centers to keep the registration applications submitted by the farmers with themselves till the payment of compensation or for two years, whichever is later.
Roles and Responsibilities of Insurance Agents 1. To guide the farmers on the restructured weather based Fruit Crop Insurance Scheme.
2. Assisting farmers in preparing insurance proposals in prescribed format and compiling various documents including Aadhaar numbers and mobile numbers of loanee and non-loanee farmers.
3. Collecting and paying the premium as a representative of the insurance company as per the guidelines of Restructured Weather Based Fruit Crop Insurance Scheme.
4. Collect the information of the loanee and non-loanee farmers in the form and submit it to the insurance company along with the insurance premium on time. In this way, only those applications which are submitted in time and the insurance premium amount is deposited electronically on the National Crop Insurance Portal within the prescribed time will be eligible for insurance coverage.
The concerned insurance representatives should ensure that the farmer participating in the scheme is not deprived of the benefits of the scheme. In case the beneficiary farmer is deprived of the benefit of this scheme due to the errors/ delay/ negligence of the insurance agent, then the concerned insurance company will be responsible for paying any compensation in this regard. If any errors/ omissions are found in the service of the insurance representative, administrative/ legal action will be taken.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Insured Farmers Duties and Responsibilities of the Loanee Farmers 1. Loanee farmers have the option to join or not join the scheme.
Borrower farmers can decide whether to join the scheme or not. Announcement regarding non-inclusion of farmers in the scheme before the season or seven days before the deadline for joining the scheme.
21
# Page 22
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
is expected to provide. If the declaration of the farmers is received seven days before the deadline for joining the scheme, the loanee farmers will be excluded from the participation of the scheme for the next season.
The declaration of participation or non-participation in the scheme is required to be submitted by the farmers to the bank in which the Pikkaraj account/ Kisan Credit Card account is held.
4. Loanee farmers should have separate applications for joining and not joining the scheme.
5. Participation in the scheme will be considered mandatory for all those farmers who do not give a declaration about not participating in the scheme with their own signature.
After the farmers have given a declaration about not participating in the scheme, the farmers must receive the receipt in the relevant application along with the signature stamp of the responsible officer of the branch.
If a farmer had given a declaration about not joining the scheme in the previous season, but has given a declaration about joining the scheme in the current season, then the concerned farmer needs to be registered.
If there is any change in the farmer's crop loan account/ Kisan Credit Card account, the concerned farmers are not willing to register their participation in the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana, then the banks will have to give their consent.
It is a prerequisite for a farmer to have a bank account to participate in the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana, PM Kisan, Kisan Credit Card.
10. The scheme has been made optional for the loanee farmers as per the revised guidelines of the Central Government for the farmers who have been sanctioned loans for notified crops and notified areas. The loanee farmer will be required to inform the concerned bank about the non-reduction of insurance premium for the notified crops for which he has taken a loan to opt out of the scheme (Letter of Intent-5) up to seven days before the deadline of registration. The farmers who do not inform the banks about their non-participation in the stipulated time will be considered as participating in the scheme and the insurance premium of these farmers will be deducted from the loan account in the prescribed manner.
The insurance proposals of the loanee farmers will also be accepted before the last date of joining the scheme.
All the farmers are required to submit their Aadhaar card and mobile number to the concerned bank or e-KYC within the deadline of insurance registration. As per the Aadhaar Act, it is mandatory for all banks to obtain the Aadhaar number of the farmer concerned for every loan account.
Insurance proposals are accepted only up to a predetermined date. Therefore, it is necessary for all the loanee farmers to check with their bank and ensure that the insurance proposal is submitted.
The loss of crops due to localized natural calamities (hailstorm) should be reported to the concerned bank/ financial institution/ insurance company within 48 hours.
The loanee farmers should not take loans from different banks on the same land, file insurance proposals from more than one bank or pay the insurance premium of the same crop even as a non-loanee. If this is found, the insurance cover will be denied and the insurance premium will be forfeited as well as appropriate administrative action will be taken.
Duties and responsibilities of non-loanee farmers 1. Non-loanee farmers desirous of joining the scheme should approach the nearest authorized banks/ Primary Agricultural Credit Co-operative Societies/ offices of the concerned insurance company or insurance representatives and submit the insurance proposal in the prescribed form along with the due premium and necessary documents within the stipulated time.
22
# Page 23
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
The applicant is required to submit a physical electronic verification along with his application by submitting a copy of Aadhaar card/ Aadhaar registration, 7/12 extract, Geo Tagging photo, agreement/ consent letter of the farmers having lease agreement, and a copy of the bank passbook.
3. Farmers registering through their Government Seva Kendras are required to self-attest their Aadhaar number by entering their mobile number along with the proposal.
Non-loanee farmers are required to open an account in their own name in the concerned bank.
5. Farmers should not survey their land in the insurance proposal. to be mentioned.
Farmers are required to submit 7/12 extracts as proof of holding land and self-declaration form for having notified crops in the field along with the insurance proposal. Under this scheme, applications are being received for insurance coverage of areas where there is no required growth for new plantation/ fruiting. At the same time, for some fruit crops, applications are being filed for insurance coverage on the same area for both deer and mango. In this regard, the self-declaration form of the applicant farmers participating in the form of Co-Paper 4 will be required to be attached with the application on the insurance website.
Non-loanee farmers will be able to apply for insurance cover directly through the web portal. For this, farmers can apply online on the website www. pmfby. gov. in. The payment of the premium has to be done online through the payment gateway. Once the application is completed on the system, a receipt will be sent along with a unique identification number and this SMS will be notified to the registered mobile number of the farmer.
However, when the non-loanee farmers submit their applications to the concerned insurance company or through the Crop Insurance Portal, they must have the area covered by the respective insurance cover, as well as submit the documentary evidence and Aadhaar number/ Aadhaar registration number as prescribed by the State Level Committee in this regard.
The farmers concerned will lose the right to claim (if applicable) and the premium amount if the information mentioned in the insurance proposal is found to be incorrect or inaccurate at any later stage.
9. Cases in respect of registration arise due to filing of wrong information while filling up the application. Thus, it was very difficult to determine the wrongful liability, to consider the compensation and in such cases to determine the liability for compensation.
After registering the application, the farmers will have to verify their participation by going to the Crop Insurance Scheme portal from the receipt of the proposal form (registration application) submitted. For this, the Central Government has provided the facility of bar code or Farmers ID on the receipt of farmers. In case any error is found in this verification, the farmer is required to file a written objection with the concerned government service center/ insurance company/ agriculture department within 30 days.
In order to avoid the rush of farmers to apply in the bank and to facilitate the farmers to apply, the applications/ insurance premiums of the farmers in the restructured weather-based Fruit Insurance Scheme are being accepted online through the Common Service Center (CSC) from the last Kharif season.
For this, the" Apni Sarkar Seva Kendra" (Digital Service Center) facility, operated by CSCE Governance Services India Limited in the state, has been made available to the farmers for filing applications under the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana. Our government authorized service centers operating in the state will help the farmers in filling the crop insurance applications on behalf of the insurance company appointed by the Department of Agriculture and will accept the insurance premiums. Documents required for insurance application such as 7/12 extract, Aadhaar card, bank account details, etc. will be linked to the application form online. The farmers will be provided with insurance cover. Accordingly, it is mandatory for the respective insurance companies to enter into an agreement through the CSC. In this regard, the instructions issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India, will remain binding.
23
# Page 24
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO-2020/ PR No. 13/10-A
In order to bring about ease, transparency and accountability in the process of delivery of government services, benefits and payments to the beneficiaries through the use of Aadhaar, the Gazette of India dated 08.02.2017 has made it mandatory for all borrower and non-borrower farmers participating in the scheme to get their Aadhaar card authenticated from Kharif season 2017 onwards.
Since Aadhaar card of farmers has been made mandatory for participation in the scheme, all banks are required to obtain Aadhaar number of their farmers. This will be applicable to non-loanee farmers registered with banks as well as insurance companies and insurance intermediaries. If Aadhaar card is not available, then it is necessary to register Aadhaar and submit its proof for participation in the crop insurance scheme.
As per the notification of Aadhaar Act, it is mandatory for all banks to obtain Aadhaar/ Aadhaar enrolment number while sanctioning crop loan/ Kisan Credit Card under the interest subvention scheme. So that there is no question of loanee farmers joining the restructured weather based crop insurance scheme without Aadhaar. The concerned bank branches are required to review such account holders from time to time.
Use of Computing System for Fund Distribution The State Government will try to use Public Financial Management System (PFMS)/ PFMS Linked System as far as possible to disburse the State share of insurance premium to the companies.
Banks, CSCs and insurance agents are required to pay the premium to the insurer through the payment-gateway (Pay-Gov) of the National Crop Insurance Portal or through RTGS/ NEFT. After this, it will be mandatory to upload the details of this payment on the National Crop Insurance Portal within the prescribed time frame. The bank details of the insurance companies will be made available on the National Crop Insurance Portal. Accordingly, all stakeholders including insurance companies, bank branches, CSCs and insurance agents must mandatorily maintain dedicated bank accounts for this purpose. No remittances/ financial transactions in the form of bank cheques/ demand drafts are allowed.
Service charge: 4% of the premiums deposited by the borrower and the non-borrower farmers will be paid to the banks as bank service charge by the respective insurance company. The insurance company has to pay the amount within 15 days after the data is confirmed on the portal.
Insurance representatives will be paid a commission at a rate determined by the insurance company. However, this commission will be within the limits set by the insurance regulatory authority.
In case of delay in payment of service charge by the insurance company, interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum will be payable.
No service charge will be payable in respect of insurance proposals where there are discrepancies/ inaccuracies/ discrepancies.
The insurance companies should pay the service charge to their government service centers as per the rates fixed by the central government.
Goods and Services Tax (GST): The restructured weather-based crop insurance scheme has been exempted from the Goods and Services Tax (GST).
Controlling Officer and Drawing and Disbursing Officer: The Commissioner (Agriculture), Agriculture Commissionerate, Maharashtra State, Pune will be the controlling officer for this scheme. The Assistant Director (Accounts-1), Agriculture Commissionerate, Maharashtra State, Pune-1 is being declared as the Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
Further, all the terms and conditions prescribed by the Central Government from time to time in the guidelines for the scheme shall be applicable to all the participants of the scheme.
23. The said Government Decision. This is being issued as per the guidelines of the Central Government and as per the approval given in the meeting of the State Level Crop Insurance Coordination Committee held on 04/05/2020 and 04/06/2020 under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, State of Maharashtra.
24. Subsidy to be given to the farmers participating in the scheme through Agriculture Insurance Company of India.
24
# Page 25
GOVERNMENT DECISION NO.: FAVIO 2020/ Q.No. 13/10-A
The amount to be paid in the share capital should be divided by the following semantic provision for the following head of account.
Demand No.D-3
Head of Accounts 2401- Crop Protection
110 (two) Schemes under the Five Year Plans, State Plans,
(00) (07) Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme
(24019402), 33 Financial Assistance
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37
# Page 38
# Page 39
# Page 40
# Page 41
# Page 42
# Page 43
# Page 44
# Page 45
# Page 46
# Page 47
# Page 48
# Page 49
# Page 50
# Page 51
# Page 52
# Page 53
# Page 54
# Page 55
# Page 56
# Page 57
# Page 58
# Page 59
# Page 60
# Page 61
# Page 62
# Page 63
# Page 64
# Page 65
# Page 66
# Page 67
# Page 68
# Page 69
# Page 70
# Page 71
# Page 72
# Page 73
# Page 74
# Page 75
# Page 76
# Page 77
# Page 78
# Page 79
# Page 80
# Page 81
# Page 82