# Page 1
Providing for appeal and revision in cases in the purview of the administrative department of PADUM (Dairy Development Department) where there is no provision for appeal/ revision in the Acts, Rules, Regulations and Government decisions.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying Development and Fisheries
Government Decision No. Sankirna-2021/ P.S.No.08/ Padum-17
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk
Ministry Extension, Mumbai-400032.
The date: September 2, 2021.
Introduction: In many cases of the Dairy Development Department, there is no provision to appeal against the decision taken by the Regional Offices or to submit a review application, so the affected person is directly referred to the Dairy Development Department. You have to go to the High Court.
Therefore, many unnecessary court cases arise in the field offices/ zonal offices as well as at the government level.
Such court cases lead to unnecessary filing of affidavits, which is a waste of time for the government and the field offices.
In view of the above facts, the matter of making provision for appeal and revision in the cases under the jurisdiction of the Dairy Development Department in which there is no provision for appeal or revision to the affected person in the Acts, Rules, Regulations and Government decisions was under the consideration of the Government.
Government Decision: For the cases in the jurisdiction of the Dairy Development Department in which there is no provision for appeal or review in the Act, Rules, Regulations and Government Decisions, this Government Decision provides for appeal and review as follows.
Commissioner, Dairy Development- The Appellate Authority The Commissioner, Dairy Development shall be the Appellate Authority to appeal against the decision taken by the Regional Offices in the matters relating to the Dairy Development Department.
The Appellate Authority shall be bound to decide on the appeal within 60 days after the applicant has appealed within the prescribed period. If the Commissioner does not take a decision within 60 days, the applicants can appeal to the Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum).
Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum)- Reconsideration Officer (A) The applicant can file a revision application against the decision taken by the Commissioner, Dairy Development in the appeal to the Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum) within 30 days.
(b) If any person is aggrieved by the decision in a matter in which the Commissioner is directly empowered to take a decision, the applicant may file a first appeal against such decision with the Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum) within 30 days.