# Page 1
Providing for appeal and revision of cases in the jurisdiction of the administrative department of PADUM (Fisheries Development Department) where there is no provision for appeal/ revision in the Acts, Rules, Regulations and Government decisions.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying Development and Fisheries
Government Decision No.2021/ P.S.08/ Padum-17
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk
Ministry, Extension, Mumbai-400032.
The date: September 2, 2021.
Introduction: In many cases of the Fisheries Development Department, there is no provision for submitting an appeal or revision against the decision taken by the field offices. You have to go to court. Therefore, many unnecessary court cases arise in the field offices/ zonal offices as well as at the government level. Such court cases lead to unnecessary filing of affidavits, which is a waste of time for the government and the field offices.
In view of the above facts, the matter of making provision for appeal and revision in the cases under the jurisdiction of the Fisheries Development Department in which there is no provision for appeal or revision to the affected person in the Acts, Rules, Regulations and Government decisions was under the consideration of the Government.
Government Decision: The Government Decision provides for appeal and review in the following cases in the jurisdiction of the Fisheries Development Department where the provisions of appeal or review have not been made in the Act, Rules, Regulations and Government Decisions.
Commissioner, Fisheries Development- The Commissioner, Fisheries Development shall be the Appellate Authority for appeals against decisions taken by the Regional Offices in matters relating to the Fisheries Development Department. Applicants must submit a response within 30 business days.
The Appellate Authority shall be bound to decide on the appeal within 60 days after the applicant has appealed within the prescribed period. If the Commissioner does not take a decision within 60 days, the applicants can appeal to the Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum).
Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum)- Recovery Officer (a) Against the decision taken by the Commissioner, Fisheries Development in the appeal, the applicant can file a recovery application with the Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum) within 30 days.
(b) If any person is aggrieved by the decision in a matter in which the Commissioner is directly empowered to take a decision, the applicant may file a first appeal against such decision with the Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Additional Chief Secretary (Padum) within 30 days.