# Page 1
The Maharashtra State Other Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation and the Vasantrao Naik Vimukt Jati and Nomadic Tribes Development Corporation (MSRDC) are the two state governments. ) regarding the implementation of the policy of compassionate exemption to the employees of the corporation of Mumbai.
The Government of Maharashtra
Other Backward Bahujan Welfare Department
Government Decision No: ACMPA 2022/ Q. No.2/ Corporations,
Madam Cama Road, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032
Date of release: March 17, 2022
Reference:: 1) General Administration Department, S.No. No.102/ 8, Dy. 21/09/2017 2) General Administration Department, S.No. No.112/ K-8, Dy. 27/09/2021 3) Managing Director, Vasantrao Naik Vimukt Jati Nomadic Tribes Development Corporation, Mumbai. Proposal dated 20.01.2022
Preamble: It was under consideration of the Government to implement the policy of compassionate appointment to the officers/ employees of the two corporations under the control of the Department, namely Vasantrao Naik Vimukt Jati and Nomadic Tribes Development Corporation and Maharashtra State Other Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation.
Government Decision: Reference No. Provisions have been made in respect of compassionate appointments under Government Decisions 1 and 2. The decision will be applicable to the Maharashtra State Other Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation and the Vasantrao Naik Vimukt Jati and Nomadic Tribes Development Corporation.
Since the Maharashtra State Other Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation and the Vasantrao Naik Vimukt Jati and Nomadic Tribes Development Corporation have been formed in accordance with the Companies Act, 1956, the officers/ employees of these corporations should be appointed on compassionate grounds with the approval of the boards of directors of the respective corporations.
3. While implementing the policy of compassionate appointment, in the context of General Administration Department, the The Corporation shall be required to comply with the provisions mentioned in the Annexure attached as on 21.09.2019.