# Page 1
Removal of requirement of renewal of registration certificate as per Maharashtra Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 2017.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Industry, Energy and Labour
Government Resolution, No. - MSA 02/2019/ S.No.33 (Part-1)/ Workers-10
Ministry, Mumbai- 400 032.
The date: March 2, 2019.
The Maharashtra Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 2017.
The Maharashtra Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2018.
Section 6 (3) and 6 (4) of the Maharashtra Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 2017, provide for a period of ten years for renewal of registration certificate issued under this Act. Also, rules 6 and 7 under this Act have been made regarding renewal of registration. The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) has recommended that the requirement of renewal of registration under the Shops and Establishment Act by the state should be removed. Accordingly, the matter of removing the condition of renewal of registration certificate under the Shops and Establishment Act was under consideration of the government.
Section 4 of the Maharashtra Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 2017 empowers the government to exempt any establishment or any class of establishments or workers or persons from any provision of this Act. In exercise of the powers conferred under the provisions of the aforesaid Section 4 (1) of the said Act, all establishments to be registered under Section 6 of the said Act are being exempted from the provision of renewal of certificate of registration after ten years. Accordingly, all establishments registered under Section 6 of the Maharashtra Shops and Establishments (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service), Act, 2017 will no longer be required to renew the certificate of registration.