# Page 1
The new industrial policy of Maharashtra 2019.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Industry, Energy and Labour
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Madam Cama Road, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032
Date of release: March 7, 2019
Reference:- Government Resolution No.M.Audho-2017/ P.S. 229/ Industries-2 dated 14th February, 2018
Preamble: Since the period of Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2013 was up to 31/03/2018, it was extended by the decision of the Government in context till the new Industrial Policy comes into force. Before the announcement of the new industrial policy, the draft of the new industrial policy was prepared at the government level by holding meetings at the divisional level with various industrial organizations, representatives of industry, entrepreneurs and public representatives. Approval for this policy was pending with the government.
Government Decision: To create a balanced industrial development of the State of Maharashtra and thereby achieve economic development and to promote the establishment of new industrial units and create substantial employment opportunities.
As per the approval given by the State Cabinet in its meeting held on 27.02.2019, the" Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019" is being announced under this Government decision. The Marathi and English copies of the said policy are annexed to this Government Resolution and the following items are specifically approved by the said Government Resolution.
Vision, Mission and Objectives of the Industrial Policy of the State.
Maharashtra is a global investment, manufacturing and technological hub that promotes sustainable development.
Mission: To achieve balanced regional and inclusive growth by enhancing the manufacturing ecosystem, creating ease of doing business, thereby becoming the most preferred destination for global manufacturers and investors, and generating maximum employment, to grow the State's economy to US$ 1 trillion by 2025.
Objectives of the policy: The objectives of the State Industrial Policy-2019 are as follows: To maintain the leading position in industrial investment by creating a conducive business environment.
Maintain high levels of employment generation by promoting Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
Page 1 of 80
# Page 2
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
To promote regionally balanced, environmentally sustainable and inclusive industrial growth.
Target To achieve the target of bringing the share of manufacturing sector to 25% in the Gross State Domestic Product by 2023-2024 by maintaining the growth rate of manufacturing sector from 12 to 13%.
* Rs. 10 lakh crore investment.
To create employment opportunities for 40 lakh people by 2023-24.
3. development of industrial infrastructure.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will continue to function as a dedicated mechanism for developing industrial infrastructure. The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will work according to the availability of land and to provide infrastructure as follows.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) will be primarily committed to developing the existing infrastructure in their existing industrial estates wherever required. The MOU Corporation will also be committed to creating world class infrastructure in the new industrial estate. as well as the need for future
The MOU Corporation will also develop infrastructure in the planned industrial areas. For example.
20 Industrial Nodes, DMICs and various Central/ State Government Industrial Corridor Projects in Samruddhi Highway.
3.1.2 New industrial estates (multi-sector and sector wise) will be planned and developed as per the needs of the industries. For this, the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will prepare a perspective plan to promote orderly and regionally balanced industrial development across the state in the next 5 to 10 years. Necessary measures will be taken to promote green industrialization in these areas.
3.1.3 The necessary industrial infrastructure will be planned by the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation taking into account the needs of the future Industry 4.0, referred to as the Fourth Industrial Revolution, and high-tech such as air taxis, drones, driverless vehicles, etc.
3.1.4 There is a large amount of land available in the State. To boost investment of Rs 10 lakh crore, it is necessary to provide the necessary land for industry. Considering this need, the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will assess the demand and create land pool across the state.
3.1.5 For development of various industrial units having continuous area of more than 10 acres or industrial units having area of more than 10 acres in the State excluding the area of Urban Local Bodies.
Stand-alone Developer for development of land parcel as well as Government of India and State Page 2 of 80
# Page 3
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) will be declared as Special Planning Authority for industrial clusters approved under the schemes of the Government. M. and V.
The Corporation will only give permission for ease of doing business however, infrastructure in any such area will not be provided by the M.O.V. Corporation.
3.1.6 MIDC shall reserve at least 500 acres of industrial area for development of warehousing and logistics facilities in the State.
3.1.7 On the lines of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation areas, 50% additional mat area above the basic mat area index will be permissible in all cooperative industrial estates.
For this, the MUV Corporation will charge the premium as per the rate fixed by the state government.
3.1.8 The land reserved for public health facilities in Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation industrial estates will be developed by the respective departments. The ESIC Hospital facility will be provided by the Public Health Department as per the demands and requirements of the concerned industrial associations.
3.1.9 As per the respective policies of the State Government, the land use exchange within the permissible additional floor area index limits for the respective sectors (IT& ITeS, Biotechnology, Garmenting, Gems& Jewellery, Logistics& Warehousing) will be approved as per the requirement with the permission of the State Government.
3.1.10 Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will manufacture flatted sludge for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
3.2.Taking advantage of special projects:
The Industries Department of the Government of Maharashtra will encourage setting up of industrial estates on the route of important projects declared as special projects by the Central/ State Government such as Maharashtra Samruddhi Highway, Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor, Sagarmala, Bharatmala etc.
The M/ s U. O. V. Corporation will act as the" Nodal Agency" for developing industrial nodes on the lines of special projects of the Central/ State Government.
(a) Maharashtra Samruddhi Highway
The Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC)
Sagarmala and Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs) Critical Industrial Infrastructure Fund: There is a huge demand for funds from stakeholders for key infrastructure such as end-stage road connectivity, dedicated power lines, water supply, etc. in industrial areas outside the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) area. The need for such funds and Page 3 of 80
# Page 4
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Considering its visible impact, the determinant that was built during the previous policy
The Central Industrial Infrastructure Fund (CIIF) has been increased to Rs. 1000 crore will continue with the increased corpus. The funds will be used for providing last mile connectivity and for creation and upgradation of industrial infrastructure such as power networks, sewage treatment plants, roads, etc. As mentioned in the previous policy for the infrastructure and facilities of industrial clusters and various industrial parks, Rs. The fund will be sanctioned and managed by a committee headed by the Chief Secretary. The State Government will provide funds in a phased manner through budgetary provision during the policy period under the expenditure on the programme.
3.4. To promote development of private industrial infrastructure.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation has insufficient land in the industrial area.
There is unplanned industrial development in many areas. To rationalize this and encourage local entrepreneurship, the state will aim to attract private investment for the development of a private industrial estate focused on micro, small and medium enterprises.
3.4.1 To encourage private sector participation in the development of industrial infrastructure, projects will be supported to establish industrial parks associated with the thrust sectors identified in this policy.
3.4.2 Preference will be given to industrial estates developed for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by women/ SC/ ST entrepreneurs and additional 100% financial assistance will be provided. The funds for this will be provided by the Social Justice Department and the Tribal Development Department.
3.4.3 Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be the planning authority for these private industrial estates.
4. Encouraging thrust sectors.
To shift industrial development towards emerging high-tech sectors and create jobs
The State Government has given priority to the following areas for construction: Projects in thrust sectors will be given priority in allocation of space and special incentives will also be given to them.
Electric Vehicles (Production, Infrastructure and Maintenance). Aviation and Defence Manufacturing Industry iii. Industry 4.0 (Artificial Intelligence, Trimetric Printing, Space Technology, Mechanical Engineering, Micro Technology, etc.) Page 4 of 80.
# Page 5
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Integrated Data Centre Parks (IDCP) v Manufacturing of Textile Machinery vi. biotechnology, medical devices
Agriculture and Food Processing Industries (Second and Third Food Processing Industries only). Information Technology (IT) and Information Technology Enabled Services (ITeS). Electronic System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) and Semiconductor Fabrication (FAB). Logistics and warehousing xi. Production of green energy/ biofuels. Production of sports and gym equipment. Production of equipment for nuclear power plants. Mineral and forest-based industries
The committee constituted under the chairmanship of the Secretary (Industries) will have the power to decide which industries will contribute to the industrialization of the state in the coming days and which sector of industry should be given the status of niche segment/ sunrise sector and should be called thrust sector.
5. Promotion of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Micro, small and medium enterprises are the backbone of the State's economy. Maharashtra has more than 3 million micro, small and medium enterprises, the highest in the country.
Maharashtra has the highest number of micro, small and medium enterprises in the country, contributing more than 80 per cent of the total employment. Micro, small and medium enterprises are the best medium to harness local resources and generate local entrepreneurship and employment. About 40% of exports are from Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. Therefore, these initiatives will be encouraged for industrial development and employment generation, especially for small industrial units.
For the purpose of giving, the limit of fixed capital investment (FCI) has been increased to Rs 50 crore. The following policy measures are being approved separately to provide incentives to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
District-wise assessment of potential Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises: To study the production potential of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and to determine and implement the strategy, the State Government will conduct a Geographical Indication (GI) based study in all the districts of Maharashtra. Geometrically based products are not only a legacy of our rich tradition but also a testament to the skills and wisdom of rural artisans, craftsmen, farmers and small artisans. It is not only our duty to preserve such rich traditions and give them a place in the industrial policy but also make them a part of our economy.
Page 5 of 80
# Page 6
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
It will be part of India. The task will be entrusted to the Maharashtra State Small Industries Corporation (MSSIDC).
Launch of a new flagship scheme- Mukhyamantri RozgarGran Yojana (CMEGP) The Chief Minister Employment Generation Scheme (CMEGP) will be launched for the unemployed youth and the new scheme aims to motivate the local youth towards self-employment by providing financial assistance from the bank in a simple and easy manner. The scheme will be applicable to all segments of the manufacturing and services sector. The Industries Department of the Government of Maharashtra will be the apex agency to implement the scheme. Under this scheme, eligible persons in the age group of 18-45 years will be trained and encouraged for self-employment and share capital backend for the same.
The subsidy will be converted into a loan which the state government will give as per the bank loan. The project cost is Rs. 50 lakh and Rs. It is limited to Rs 10 lakh.
The scheme is being implemented through the Directorate of Industries and the Khadi and Village Industries Board.
will be done. The State Government will provide financial assistance to the programme. Funds will be provided from the Special Component Plan (SCP) or Tribal Measures (TSP) as per requirement. The salient features of the programme are:
Incentives for self-employment- at least 1,00,000 micro enterprises during the policy period.
Creation of Employment Opportunities- Minimum of 10 Lakhs during the policy period.
Entrepreneurship Development Programme for Youth- 2,00,000 youth during the policy period.
Financial assistance through Grant Scheme- 15% to 35% of the approved project cost.
The scheme covers the manufacturing and business/ service sectors.
F. Promotion of rural and semi-urban economy.
Institutional Support to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises: Adoption and dissemination of technology to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, market analysis,
The State Government will support the MSMEs to strengthen the existing relevant institutions in Maharashtra to improve the lot of Bambis including training etc.
Institutional collaborations through setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoEs), training facilities, workshops and world-class micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) as envisaged in the accompanying policy.
The State Government will take initiative for mutual cooperation/ understanding between the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the State.
Industrial Cluster Promotion: Group-based incentives to improve industrial cluster promotion development.
As stated in the accompanying policy, the following measures are planned:
Page 6 of 80
# Page 7
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Financial incentives will be provided by the State Governments for the approved Common Facility Centres in the States, excluding A and B regions.
The limit of financial assistance for cluster development will be increased from the existing Rs.5.5 crore to Rs.10 crore.
The 20 per cent area in the new industrial estates of the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be reserved for micro, small and medium enterprises. Out of this, 20 per cent of the area will be reserved for SC/ ST entrepreneurs and 5 per cent for women entrepreneurs and industrial units of women self-help groups. For the rehabilitation of ex-servicemen, 2 per cent of the land area will be reserved for providing self-employment opportunities.
Common Facility Centres (CFCs) established under the Central/ State Government's cluster development schemes will be considered as industrial activity.
V. Facilitating Public Funding to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises: Many micro, small and medium enterprises in the state have the potential to expand to a large extent. Therefore, micro, small and medium enterprises can now receive public funds through listing on stock exchanges. The State Government will support Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by providing financial assistance to the first 250 SMEs in Maharashtra to be listed on SME Exchange, Mumbai during the policy period.
Consultative Cell for Resolution of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Issues of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises: The Government of Maharashtra will set up a Regional Division-wise Cell under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 for immediate resolution of insolvency and debt issues of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and to guide the concerned stakeholders. For this purpose, the Maharashtra State Small Industries Development Corporation will be strengthened and empowered.
Financial Incentives to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises As defined in the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Act, 2006 of the Central Government, the fixed capital investment of small enterprises is Rs. The Government has approved to provide consolidated financial incentives under the Collective Incentive Scheme to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) up to Rs. 50 crore subject to the overall limits of such incentives as mentioned in the table below and the accompanying policy.
Page 7 of 80
# Page 8
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Table No. Eligibility Criteria for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Classification of Taluk/ Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Maximum limit for Fixed Capital Investment (Rs. crore)                                                                                                                                                                                            | Limit on percentage of fixed capital investment | Period of Eligibility (Years) |
| l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | As per this policy, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall be defined as defined in the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Act, 2006 of the Central Government and as small enterprise units having fixed capital investment up to Rs. |
| 30%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 40%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 7                                               |
| d.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 50%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 10                                              |
| D+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | The 60%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 10                                              |
| Vidarbha, Marathwada, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg and Dhule.                                                                                                                                                                                         | 80%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 10                                              |
| Non-industry districts, Naxal affected districts* and Aspirational districts                                                                                                                                                                   | 100%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 10                                              |
| Aspirational districts of Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar as per Government Resolution No.PSI-2013/ (CR-54)/ Industry-8 dated 1st April 2013 issued by the Department of Industries, Energy and Labour, Government of Maharashtra. |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Attracting investment in large, large and ultra-large projects.
Maharashtra has the largest number of projects in the country. the country's large and
The policy has made concerted efforts to achieve balanced and inclusive regional development as the mega projects have resulted in huge revenue and employment generation.
7.1 Priority to large enterprises
Large industries are defined as those units which meet the minimum threshold of fixed capital investment or direct employment as given in the table below.
Financial assistance to large industries will be provided in such a way that maximum number of industries
It will be set up in underdeveloped areas of the state. Subject to the terms and conditions stated in the accompanying policy
Financial incentives to large enterprises will not exceed the total amount of their basket of incentives.
Page 8 of 80
# Page 9
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Table 2- Eligibility Criteria for Large Enterprises
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Taluka/ Division Category                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Minimum Fixed Capital Investment (Rs. crore) | Minimum direct employment generation (NUMBER) |
| A. B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 750                                          | 1000                                          |
| 500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 750                                          |
| 250                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 500                                          |
| D+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 150                                          | 400                                           |
| Marathwada, Vidarbha, Sindhudurg, Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg districts.                                                                                                                                                                          | 100                                          | 300                                           |
| Non-industry districts, Naxal affected districts* and Aspirational districts                                                                                                                                                                   | 100                                          | 250                                           |
| Aspirational districts (Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar) as per Government Resolution No. PSI-2013/ (CR-54)/ Industry-8 dated 1st April 2013 issued by the Department of Industries, Energy and Labour, Government of Maharashtra. |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note- The maximum fixed capital investment limit of Rs.50 crore for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the State is higher than the above table no. Industrial Development Subsidy on State Goods and Services Tax (SGST) payable on first sale in the State up to a limit of 40% shall be admissible to eligible industry units having fixed capital investment up to the minimum investment limit for large industries prescribed in Section 2 of the Act. However, these incentives will not be applicable for category A and B.
Additional incentives and other incentives such as stamp duty waiver, payment of electricity duty, payment discount, etc. will be admissible to large industries in the thrust sector as per the terms and conditions mentioned in the policy attached.
Encouraging large and complex projects
8.1 In order to attract such investments, certain combined incentives will be provided to these projects, considering the multiple benefits accruing from mega projects.
8.2 Industries meeting the thresholds for fixed capital investment or direct employment mentioned in the table below shall be termed as large/ very large projects.
Page 9 of 80
# Page 10
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Table 3- Eligibility Criteria for Distribution of Concessions to Large and Micro Enterprises
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| The type of industry                                                                          | Taluka/ Division Category | Minimum Fixed Capital Investment (Rs. crore) | Minimum direct employment generation (number of persons) |
| A large-scale project                                                                         | A and B                   | 1500                                         | 2000                                                     |
| a                                                                                             | 1000                      | 1500                                         |
| d.                                                                                            | 750                       | 1000                                         |
| D+                                                                                            | 500                       | 750                                          |
| Sindhudurg, Ratnagiri, Raigad, Palghar and Sindhudurg districts have been affected by floods. | 350                       | 500                                          |
| Non-industry districts, Naxalite affected areas* and Aspirational districts**                 | 200                       | 350                                          |
| Big project                                                                                   | for the entire State.     | 4000                                         | 4000                                                     |
| Aspirational districts of Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar.                        |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the accompanying policy:
• Full-year qualified jobs for very large/ large enterprises according to the criteria of employment
You have to be in your actual job. at any time of the year
If the employment criterion is not met, the industrial incentive support for that year will not be admissible.
The High Powered Committee constituted under Government Resolution IDL-1005/ PR No.119/ U-8 dated 02.06.2005 under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary will approve certain customized packages to be given to large and ultra-large projects.
Government Resolution No. IDL-1097/ (13478)/ U-8 dated 18th January, 1998 and Government Resolution No. IDL-1004/ PR No. 318/ U-8 dated 24th January, 1998
Restored in December 2004. Cabinet Sub-Committee on Industries chaired by the Chief Minister
Will allow customized packages to be offered.
8.3 crore in the State. 9% equity participation of the State Government through the Maharashtra Sales Tax Bond Authority in large, large and ultra-large projects with fixed capital investment of more than Rs 500 crore Page 10 of 80
# Page 11
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
It will be. This partnership will be in lieu of incentives received for these projects during the policy period of Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019. The partnership will be in the form of equity shares only. The shares and dividends will be issued in the name of Maharashtra Sales Tax Securities Authority. If the state government wants to sell its shares, it will be sold only at the current market price. The right of first refusal will be of the promoter of the industrial unit concerned. So that the acquisition due to business competition/ jealousy/ business rivalry is avoided.
8.4 Large and very large projects to be promoted under the collective incentive scheme by the State Government will be required to provide employment to the local people as per the employment policy prescribed by the State Government. If not, the incentives will be reduced.
Micro, Small, Medium, Large, Large and Micro Enterprises in the State are given incentives/ concessions by other departments of the State Government, in addition to the Collective Incentive Scheme.
The financial returns/ incentives to the units from all sources shall be admissible only to the extent of 100% of the total fixed capital investment made by the unit.
Supporting green industrialization.
Maharashtra is a leading state in the initiative for sustainable development and it promotes green industrialization, which will reduce the adverse impact on the environment.
Green industrialization support will be provided to eligible industries as per the policy attached to undertake the process of conservation of water, energy and environment.
Promoting R& D R& D is crucial for productivity and economic progress of a sector.
Strong R& D infrastructure contributes directly to sustainable development and creates new employment opportunities for the scientific community. Keeping this in mind, the government will encourage research and development as mentioned in the accompanying policy.
11. Promoting creation of an ecosystem for Startups: The new industrial policies will provide support to the state government as part of the policy to create a conducive environment for entrepreneurship by providing necessary infrastructure to innovative start-ups.
As mentioned in the accompanying policy, the new entrepreneurs will be supported with financial support, mentoring and adequate measures will be taken to facilitate exchange of ideas.
Recycling of assets of closed units for industrial purposes for the next 5 years. Considering the investment target of Rs 10 lakh crore, the state needs to have adequate land availability for that investment to materialise. The availability of land has become poor, especially in the developed parts of the state. Considering these aspects, the government will provide financial incentives to the industries to invest in underdeveloped areas. In addition to the
Page 11 of 80
# Page 12
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
The government also intends to use the lands of the closed industries as mentioned in the added policy.
12.1 VISHAL ABHAY SCHEME The State Government will introduce a Special Abhaaya Scheme for payment of Government dues and penalties to all closed down industries, including Government agencies, by reimbursing an amount of the Government dues and waiving off the interest and/ or penalty thereon. The scheme will be operational for a limited period. The Maharashtra State Financial Corporation will announce an attractive one-time repayment scheme (OTS).
12.2 Relinquishment of land of closed industrial units* Those units which are closed for the last 5 years and have 20,000 sq.m. of land available in the industrial area of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be allowed to set up industrial clusters.
A special initiative will be taken to reuse this land. The use of industrial land will be in the ratio of 60:40 i.e. 60 percent industrial and 40 percent ancillary services will be allowed in the area of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation.
Without providing non-fiscal incentives for the purpose of development of this place, the developer will not come forward. Therefore, a 4-member committee is being appointed under the chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) to formulate the criteria for additional mat area index, including the cost of levying. These include Secretary (Navi-I), Secretary (Finance/ Expenditure), Development Commissioner (Industries) and Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
The project is to be completed within a period of seven years.
13. Walk to Work concept H To decongest the city by promoting" Walk to Work" concept, satellite offices will be developed in the state. Industries will be encouraged to develop residential facilities for employees within a radius of 5 km from the place of work.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be the planning authority for such areas and other government agencies will be involved in the development. Not for the purpose of development
Developers will not come forward without fiscal incentives. Therefore, a 4-member committee is being appointed under the chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) to formulate the criteria for additional mat area index, including the cost of levying.
These include Secretary (Navi-I), Secretary (Finance/ Expenditure), Development Commissioner (Industries) and Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
In the residential sector, commercial establishments such as cinema halls, public auditoriums and multiplexes, hospitals, nursing homes, schools and colleges, training institutes and hostels associated with them.
# Page 13
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
purposes will be permitted. Only polluting industries and services will be allowed.
To bring ease of doing business in the state and to empower Maharashtra Industry, Trade and Investment Cell (Maitri).
Maitri is a step by the state government to facilitate business. It has been very effective in granting clearances/ permissions/ licenses to numerous activities since its inception. Maitri has changed the role of the government from a regulator to a facilitator. Considering the new opportunities in the field of business, trade and commerce, Maitri will be given autonomous status for effective implementation of the initiatives taken by the Government to promote industry, trade and commerce. Along with this, the points mentioned in the accompanying policy have been approved.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will act as an interface for the tax purposes of the local body in the industrial area of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation.
Appellate powers will be given to the Friendship Cell under the State Services Act.
Also, a separate law will be enacted for the effective functioning of the Friendship Cell.
Initiatives for Trade and Commerce The Government is approving the creation of a separate cell/ office under the Department of Industries to promote trade and commerce and a separate cell in the Directorate of Industries to assist in its implementation.
16 Global Investment Promotion Council (GIIC) was set up by the State Government to take advantage of the interest shown by global investors to invest. Global Investment Promotion Council to be set up under the chairmanship of Chief Minister
The summit will create a strong network of entrepreneurs from across the world to attract investments in various sectors in the state. In the future, the conference will establish bilateral relations with countries in the United States, Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Africa, etc. Various activities will be carried out by this conference as mentioned in the accompanying policy.
17 Export Operations Initiatives A study report has been prepared to formulate an export strategy, which highlights the key sectors for export growth as textiles, engineering goods, agro-products and processed foods, IT/ ITeS, auto and auto components and pharmaceuticals and chemicals. Also for export. Export Steering Council chaired by the Minister (Industries)
Page 13 of 80
# Page 14
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
will be established. The main functions of the Council in this regard shall be as set out in the accompanying policy.
17.1 Export Infrastructure Support
As per the policy, the state government will provide assistance for finalization of the exhibition and convention centre, setting up of testing and quality certification laboratories.
17.2 Venture Capital Funds
The State will provide funds to SIDBI for venture capital and the same will be provided to the exporting units
(EOU) will be given as viability gap funding.
18 SPECIAL INITIATIVES Keeping in view the regionally balanced and inclusive growth, the Government has ensured the following special initiatives to boost investment and employment in the State.
18.1 Special Incentives for Industries in Underdeveloped Districts of Maharashtra To remove regional disparities in industrial development, the following sectors have been included under the policy:
Additional incentives will be provided.
Aspirational districts (Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar).
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises under the Collective Promotion Scheme-2019 in this district,
Large and mega projects will be given more time to attract investments and enjoy additional fiscal incentives and disincentives to generate employment.
For large and mega projects based on employment, the minimum for employment generation
The limit will be lower than other areas.
18.2 Special Incentives for Industries in Agriculture and Food Processing, Green Energy/ Bio-fuels and Industry 4.0 Agriculture and Food Processing (2nd and 3rd processing units and Manufacturing and Processing)
20% additional financial incentives will be provided to eligible industrial enterprises in the field of green energy/ biofuels and Industry 4.0, and two years additional financial incentives.
The eligibility period will be admissible. as well as farmers' companies.
Discounts will be allowed.
Page 14 of 80
# Page 15
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
18.3 Special Incentives for SC/ ST and Women Entrepreneurs Priority and additional financial assistance will be given to industrial estates developed or being developed for SC/ ST and women entrepreneurs.
In the new MUVM areas, 20% of the area will be allotted to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on first priority. Further, 20% of the area is reserved for SC/ ST and neo-Buddhist entrepreneurs and 5% for women entrepreneurs and industrial units of women self-help groups.
5% of the land will be allotted to the disabled on priority. Limit of preferential allotment of land in any new industrial area Maximum zonal limit of allotment in this cadre is 25%
Necessary changes will be made in the land allotment rules of the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation in this regard.
More financial assistance will be provided to entrepreneurs who set up incubators for entrepreneurs and women entrepreneurs belonging to SC/ ST communities.
19. State Level Udyog Puraskar In order to encourage the unparalleled contribution of industries for the industrial development of the State, the State Government has decided to honour such industries/ professionals with State Level Udyog Puraskar every year.
20. Empowerment of District Industries Centres.
The District Industries Centres (DICs) will be empowered to provide comprehensive information on various policies and schemes as well as to support marketing of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, trade and commerce, entrepreneurship development and revival of sick Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises at the district trade level.
State of the art apex entrepreneurship development institute in Maharashtra.
The Maharashtra State Small Industries Development Corporation (MSSIDC) will be set up at Kalamboli in Raigad district. Its salient features will remain as mentioned in the accompanying policy.
21.1 Establishment of well-equipped Exhibition and Convention Centres Exhibition and Convention Centres are being developed by State/ Local Authorities like Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation and Municipal Corporations. Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation
It will develop well-equipped exhibition and convention centres at suitable locations in the state. The State Government will provide necessary support for the development of well-equipped exhibition and convention centres.
Page 15 of 80
# Page 16
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Activities under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
As part of the goodwill gesture towards the community, the industrial units receiving incentives from the State Government under the Collective Incentive Scheme will spend at least 50% of their Corporate Social Responsibility funds for development works in the State.
Sector Specific Policies Over the years, Maharashtra has formulated/ modified sector specific policies which will be aligned with the new Industrial Policy presented.
The state government has made special provisions under various sector-wise policies of the state. These policies are as follows:
1. Manufacture of readymade garments, gems and jewellery, micro electronics and engineering components
Flatted Sludge Industrial Complexes Policy-2018 (14/02/2018)
Fintech Policy-2018 (16/02/2018)
Maharashtra Coir Policy 6, 2018 (15/02/2018)
Maharashtra Electric Vehicle Promotion Policy-2018 (14/02/2018)
Maharashtra Logistic Park Policy-2018 (14/02/2018)
Textile Policy-2018 (15/02/2018)
Cloud Computing Policy-2018 (29/01/2018)
Space and Defence Sector Production Policy-2018 (dated 14/02/2018)
The Information Technology and IT enabled Services Policy, 2015
(SD 25/08/2015)
Maharashtra Electronics Policy-2016 (vide 11/04/2016) 11. Retail Trade Policy-2016 (vide Sec. 10/02/2016) 12. Convenience allowance to Developers while developing Integrated Industrial Zones- 2018 (Sh. D. 16/02/2018)
Bharat Ratna Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Special Collective Incentive Scheme for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes- 2016 (Sh. D. 11/02/2016)
Special Policy for Women Entrepreneurs 2017 (SDG 14/12/2017) 15. Telecom Infrastructure Policy 2018 (SDG 15). D. 17/02/2018)
* Prevailing sectoral policies refer to the earlier industrial policies of Maharashtra and the general rules of concessions under them or the concessions in the collective incentive scheme.
On the publication of the said policy (Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019), unless otherwise specified, such references shall be deemed to be in conformity with the general rules or exemptions contained in the Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019.
Page 16 of 80
# Page 17
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Eligibility under various policies (e.g., Integrated Industrial Sector Policy, Electronics Policy, etc.)
Stamp duty concessions applicable to industries will continue.
24. Cabinet Sub-Committee on determining matters relating to industry:
The" Services" sector has a significant role to play in meeting the target of taking the State's economy to US$ 1 trillion by 2025. In view of this, non-incentive use of service sector will be allowed in the industrial areas of joint ventures of the State Governments which will be declared as integrated industrial areas after de-notification of Special Economic Zones. which
The services/ projects have been approved in the government policy of other administrative departments and only such services/ projects can be taken in this industrial area. In addition to this, other services/ projects are also covered under Section No. IDL-1004/ PR. No.318/ Industry-8, dated 24/12/2004
In a nutshell, Ma. A decision will be taken by the Cabinet, headed by the Chief Minister.
To review and implement the Industrial Policy-2019 of the State of Maharashtra in an effective manner and to make necessary clarifications/ interpretations thereof.
A Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary (Industries) will be functioning to monitor the progress in implementation. A Project Control Committee will be set up to implement the new Industrial Policy and to exercise control over its implementation. The project will be implemented by a committee.
Committee for Policy Changes:
Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019: In case of any doubts/ difficulties/ ambiguities, it will be decided to take necessary changes in the industrial policy
Government Resolution No. IDL-1004/ PR No. 318/ Industry-8, dated
As of 24/12/2004. The cabinet sub-committee will be headed by the Chief Minister.
Term of the Policy: The term of the policy shall be for a period of five years from the date of commencement of the policy in April 2019.
In accordance with this Government decision, all the concerned administrative departments and industries under the Department of
The offices/ offices shall take action for issuing necessary orders/ notifications expeditiously.
Page 17 of 80
# Page 18
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
The decision was announced on the official website of the Maharashtra government www.maharashtra.gov.in.
Its computer code is 201902281151549110. The order is being digitally signed.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.
Satish
Madhukar
Gavai
(Satish Gavai)
Additional Chief Secretary (Industries), Government of Maharashtra
per, 1. Principal Secretary to the Governor 2. Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister, Chief Minister's Secretariat, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
3. Ma. Private Secretary to the Minister (Industries), Mantralaya, Mumbai.
4. Ma. Private Secretary to the Minister of State (Industries), Ministry, Mumbai.
5. m. Minister (s) and Private Secretary to the Minister of State (All), Mantralaya, Mumbai.
6. Ma. Leader of the Opposition, Private Secretary to the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, Vidhan Bhavan, Mumbai.
7. m. Leader of Opposition, Private Secretary to Maharashtra Legislative Council, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, Vidhan Bhavan, Mumbai.
Private Secretary to the Speaker, Legislative Assembly, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, Vidhan Bhavan, Mumbai.
Private Secretary to the President, Legislative Council, Maharashtra Legislature Secretariat, Vidhan Bhavan, Mumbai.
10. m. Chief Secretary, Ministry of Planning, Mumbai 11. Additional Chief Secretary (Finance), Finance Department, Ministry of Finance, Mumbai 12. Additional Chief Secretary (Planning), Planning Department, Ministry of Planning, Mumbai.
13. Additional Chief Secretary (Revenue/ Stamps), Revenue and Forest Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai 14. Additional Chief Secretary, Higher and Technical Education Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
Additional Chief Secretary (Services), General Administration Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai 16. Additional Chief Secretary, School Education and Sports Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai 17. Principal Secretary (Power), Industries, Energy and Labour Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary (Labour), Industries, Energy and Labour Department, Ministry of Labour, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary (NV-1), Urban Development Department, Ministry of Urban Development, Mumbai.
20. Principal Secretary, Skill Development and Entrepreneurship Department, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Mumbai 21. Principal Secretary (V.C.A (1)), General Administration Department, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Mumbai.
Page 18 of 80
# Page 19
Government Resolution No: MOU 2019/ No.6/ Industry-2
Principal Secretary, Department of Public Health, Ministry of Health, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary, Department of Environment, Ministry of Environment, Government of India, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary, Tribal Development Department, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary (c. Department of Public Works, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary, Rural Development and Water Conservation Department, Ministry of Water Resources, Mumbai.
Principal Secretary, Department of Cooperation, Marketing and Textiles, Ministry of Textiles, Mumbai.
Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Mumbai.
Secretary, Department of Medical Education and Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Health, Mumbai.
Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Horticulture, Mumbai.
Divisional Commissioner, Pune/ Aurangabad/ Nashik/ Amravati/ Nagpur/ Navi Mumbai (Konkan Division)/ Mumbai.
Development Commissioner (Industries), Directorate of Industries, New Administration Building, Opposite Mantralaya, Mumbai.
Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation, Udyog Sarathi, Mahakali Caves Road, Andheri (East), Mumbai. 400 093.
Municipal Commissioner, Municipal Corporation (All) 36. Director, Town Planning and Valuation, Pune 37. Managing Director, City Industrial Development Corporation, Nirmal Bhawan, Nariman Point, Mumbai.
Joint Director of Industries, Directorate of Industries Pune/ Aurangabad/ Nashik/ Amravati/ Nagpur/ Navi Mumbai (Konkan Division)/ Mumbai.
40. Superintending Industries Officer, Nanded subdivision, Nanded.
General Manager, District Industries Centre (All).
Managing Director/ CEO of Corporations/ Government undertakings under the control of Industries, Energy and Labour Department.
All Joint Secretaries/ Deputy Secretaries/ Under Secretaries/ Officiating Officers in the Department of Industries, Ministries,
Mumbai.
Selection Committee (Industry-II), Department of Industry, Energy and Labour, Ministry of Labour, Mumbai.
Page 19 of 80
# Page 20
The Maharashtra Industrial Policy, 2019
Maharashtra is a leading state in the industrial development of India. Attractive industrial policies coupled with world-class infrastructure and ease of doing business have led to the establishment of many global brands in the state. The state is witnessing unprecedented technological advancements in the industry, so the state is attracting new innovative ventures and startups in various fields. Industry 4.0 and Information Technology.
IT support services are also available. Maharashtra is one of the major automobile manufacturing hubs in the country. The state is also a leader in agriculture and food processing industries. With the highest exports from the state, it has become the most preferred destination for investors. India is the third largest economy in the world due to continuous implementation of major reforms in the country and stable growth.
Strengthening the Magnetic Maharashtra brand and positioning the state as a leader in the country's economy, along with a progressive image, industrial growth and sustainable development
The state is a major contributor to the country's economy.
1.1 Introduction to Maharashtra Maharashtra, located in the western part of India, is one of the most industrialized states in the country with an estimated Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) of Rs. 24.97 lakh crore (US$ 387 billion).
It accounted for 15.01 per cent of India's total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2017-18. The economy of Maharashtra includes manufacturing, financial services, international trade, public relations, media, technology, petroleum, fashion, textiles, and other industries.
Heavy goods and jewellery, IT and IT-enabled services and tourism are the major industries. It is the capital of Maharashtra and the financial capital of the country.
Many corporate and financial institutions are headquartered in Mumbai. India's main stock exchanges (BSE& NSE), commodity exchanges and capital markets are located in the city. Maharashtra's well-established industrial, economic environment and pragmatic leadership have made the state a leading industrial and economic hub. The state has attracted a large amount of industrial investment from domestic as well as foreign investors. According to the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Government of India, Maharashtra received$ 113.82 billion from April 2000 to December 2017.
Page 20 of 80
# Page 21
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the US is about one-third of the total foreign direct investment (FDI) in the country.
Magnetic Maharashtra: Limitless Attractions Maharashtra is one of the most preferred destinations in the country for industries due to its well-developed infrastructure, skilled workforce, good transport network, strategic geographical location, policies designed for different sectors of industries, best incentives policy and many such factors. This has enabled Maharashtra to attract the highest investment from within the country and outside India and it has emerged as" Magnetic Maharashtra- Unlimited Attractions."
1.1.1 Strategic Position: Maharashtra is the third largest state in terms of area and the second largest state in terms of population. The state has an area of 3,07,690 square kilometres and an estimated population of 112.04 million as per the 2011 census. To the west of the state is the Arabian Sea and the state has an extensive coastline of 720 km. According to the 2011 census, the urbanisation rate in the state is 45.2 per cent. It is the most prosperous state in India by all important economic parameters. Mumbai, the state capital, is the largest metropolitan area in the world, the largest and most populous city in India, and the country's financial capital. After the implementation of Goods and Services Tax in India, Maharashtra is the best state to manufacture in view of the national and international markets due to the free movement of goods and services and its geographical location as a major business hub connecting North and South India.
1.1.2 Well Developed Infrastructure The State is well connected to major industrial and consumption centres by a network of roads, railways, airways and ports. With a capacity of 43000 MW, Maharashtra provides 24x7 uninterrupted power supply to industries.
The government has made arrangements through the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation that investors will get both developed and undeveloped plots.
Road network: Approximately 22,000 km from the state. National highways are long.
Maharashtra Samruddhi Mahamarg is a super communication expressway and an industrial corridor connecting Nagpur and Mumbai. The Mumbai-Vadodara Expressway is a 380 km long, six-lane, controlled-access expressway connecting Vadodara in Gujarat and Mumbai in Maharashtra.
Page 21 of 80
# Page 22
Railway network: There are two major railway zones in the state which enhance connectivity with the domestic market. The 233-km-long project is similar to metro projects like Mumbai Metro, Nagpur Metro and Pune Metro. The country's largest metro rail network is being built in Maharashtra.
Airports and Ports: Maharashtra has 7 domestic airports and 4 international airports and the state government is developing 10 more new airports. Out of which airports at Shirdi, Nashik, Nanded, Kolhapur and Jalgaon are currently operational and airports at Ratnagiri, Gondia, Sindhudurg and Amravati are proposed. The state is well connected by sea route to the world through two major ports and 53 minor ports.
1.1.3 Abundance of Skilled and Highly Educated Workforce: There are 20 Universities and 21 Deemed Universities in the State. Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs), Indian Institutes of Fashion Technology (NIFTs), Indian Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NITERs), Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Indian Institute of Construction Management Research (NICMAR), Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), etc. More than 1.6 million students are enrolled each year from more than 6,000 institutions in the state.
1.1.4 Well-established Industrial Environment:- The State's complementary industrial policy has brought many prominent industrial units to the State. According to the Economic Survey of Maharashtra, the growth rate in the manufacturing sector is expected to be 7.6 per cent in 2017-18. The state has a favourable environment for various industries such as automobile industry (Pune and Aurangabad divisions), electronic system alignment industry (Pune division), pharmaceutical industry and chemical industry (Mumbai, Thane, Aurangabad and Pune divisions), engineering (Ahmednagar, Nashik, Pune and Aurangabad divisions), consumer durables (Pune division), textile industry (Solapur and Nagpur-Amravati divisions), food processing (Solapur, Ahmednagar-Nashik, Nagpur-Amravati divisions), logistics (Mumbai-Thane and Nagpur-Amravati divisions), cement and steel industry (Vidarbha Marathwada division), information technology and allied industries (Mumbai, Thane, Pune and Nagpur Amravati divisions). During the period 2014-2018, an investment of about Rs. 192.60 crore has been made in 119 Private IT Parks in the State, which has created 5,50,000 jobs.
1.1.5 Ease of Doing Business: Dedicated Investor Facilitation Cell and a Window Scheme Website have been created under Maharashtra Industry, Trade and Investment Cell (Maitri). submission of an application due to a window scheme website,
Page 22 of 80
# Page 23
It provides for the payment of fees as well as the follow up and control of approvals by various departments of the state in the industry context. The Friendship Cell also acts as a Grievance Redressal Cell. Friendly Room G2B services, providing all services for existing and potential investors in one place. According to the World Bank's Doing Business 2019 report (covering 190 economies), India has jumped 23 places to 77th position. India was ranked 100th in 2018 and 130th in 2017. Mumbai and Delhi have been evaluated while determining this ranking (cities with more than 10 million population). Mumbai is the biggest contributor to the big jump in the World Bank ranking. According to the index of the Asian Competitive Institute" Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, Singapore," Maharashtra has been ranked first in the country in the Ease of Doing Business in 2016.
1.1.6 Favourable Policy and Promising Credibility:- Maharashtra has formulated various progressive sectoral policies for industries to create a conducive environment for business in the state. These various policies have enabled the state to maintain its top position in industrial investment. As per the Industrial Policy-2013 of Maharashtra, incentives were given to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Large Industries, Large and Micro Enterprises and employment-oriented large industries. Major events such as" Magnetic Maharashtra" and" Make in India" were organised in the state, as well as national and international road shows in which the state participated. Due to all these efforts, industrial investment proposals worth more than Rs 8 lakh crore were received in the last five years.
Vision: Maharashtra is a global investment, manufacturing and technological hub promoting sustainable development.
Mission: To achieve balanced regional and inclusive growth by enhancing the manufacturing ecosystem, creating ease of doing business, thereby becoming the most preferred destination for global manufacturers and investors, and generating maximum employment, to grow the state's economy to US$ 1 trillion by 2025.
Page 23 of 80
# Page 24
Target: To achieve the target of bringing the share of" Manufacturing" sector in the Gross State Domestic Product to 25% by 2023-24 by maintaining the growth rate of" Manufacturing" sector at 12-13%.
10 lakh crore investment.
To create employment opportunities for 40 lakh people by 2023-24.
Strategy and objectives:
5.1 Maintaining the leading position in industrial investment by creating a conducive business environment.
5.1.1 Develop dedicated state-of-the-art infrastructure as per the needs of specific sectors.
5.1.2 Creation of land pool for industries through Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation.
5.1.3. Provision of special financial incentives for projects based on critical and emerging technologies.
5.1.4 Promote investment through sector specific incentives/ policies with special focus on industries in specific thrust sectors.
5.1.5 Bring government, industry and academia on a common platform.
5.1.6. Encourage investment in R& D and start-ups.
5.1.7. To promote Ease of Doing Business, to enable a single window scheme of" Maitri" to provide all services and approvals related to the State at one place.
5.1.8 Establishment of State Level Councils to promote investment and exports.
5.1.9 Prioritize processing of agricultural products to double the income of farmers.
5.2 Maintain high level of employment generation by promoting Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
5.2.1 Creation of large scale employment opportunities through the launch of the new flagship scheme for small and medium enterprises of the State through the Chief Minister Employment Generation Scheme (CMEGP).
5.2.2 Formulate a scheme of special financial incentives for micro, small and medium enterprises and small projects.
5.2.3 Empowering Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) with the potential to create more jobs through industrial cluster development.
5.2.4 To provide institutional support to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) for improving their performance in various aspects including technology adoption and dissemination, market analysis, training, etc.
5.2.5 Contribute to increased employment generation by providing additional financial support to large and micro enterprises based on employment generation.
Page 24 of 80
# Page 25
5.2.6 To promote creation of skilled manpower by effective coordination among industry, technical institutions and skill development departments.
5.3 Promote regionally balanced, environmentally sustainable and inclusive industrial growth.
5.3.1 Provide special financial incentives for setting up industries in underdeveloped areas.
5.3.2 Increase in Critical Industrial Infrastructure Fund for last mile connectivity.
5.3.3 Creation of supplementary infrastructure in private industrial parks.
5.3.4 Provide financial incentives for development of infrastructure in industrial areas for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and entrepreneurs belonging to women and SC/ ST communities.
5.3.5 Support for revival of closed industries.
5.3.6 Ensure environmental sustainability by promoting green industrialization.
Term of the Policy: The term of the policy will be effective from 1st April, 2019 for a period of five years.
7. Building well-developed industrial infrastructure.
Quality infrastructure is an important factor for attracting global manufacturing companies, investors and other corporates to the state and for industrial development. Maharashtra has one of the best industrial infrastructures available and efforts will be made to develop world-class infrastructure and strengthen existing facilities in various industrial estates spread across the state. The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) will continue to function as a dedicated mechanism for developing industrial infrastructure.
7.1 Improvement of land availability and infrastructure.
7.1.1 Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) will be primarily committed to develop the existing infrastructure in its existing industrial estates wherever required. The MOU Corporation will also be committed to creating world class infrastructure in the new industrial estates. The MOU Corporation will also develop infrastructure in well-planned industrial areas, recognizing the need of the future.
For example, 20 industrial nodes in the Samruddhi Highway, DMIC and various Central/ State Government Industrial Corridor projects.
Page 25 of 80
# Page 26
7.1.2 New industrial estates (multi-sector and sector wise) will be planned and developed as per the needs of the industries. For this, the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will prepare a perspective plan to promote orderly and regionally balanced industrial development across the state in the next 5 to 10 years. Necessary measures will be taken to promote green industrialization in these areas.
7.1.3 The necessary industrial infrastructure will be planned by the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation taking into account the needs of the future Industry 4.0, referred to as the Fourth Industrial Revolution, and high-tech such as air taxis, drones, driverless vehicles, etc.
7.1.4 There is a large amount of land available in the state. To boost investment of Rs 10 lakh crore, necessary land needs to be made available for industry. Considering this need, the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) will assess the demand and create land pool across the state.
7.1.5 For development of various industrial units having continuous area of more than 10 acres or more than 10 acres of area excluding the area of Urban Local Bodies in the State.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) will be declared as the exclusive planning authority for the development of the existing industrial land parcels and industrial clusters approved under the schemes of the Government of India and the State Government. The Corporation will only give permission for Ease of Doing Business, however, infrastructure in any such area will not be provided by the MOU.
7.1.6 MIDC shall reserve at least 500 acres of industrial area for the development of warehousing and logistics facilities in the State.
7.1.7 50% additional mat area above the basic mat area index shall be permissible in all cooperative industrial estates on the lines of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation areas. For this, the MUV Corporation will charge the premium as per the rate fixed by the state government.
7.1.8 Flatted sludge will be manufactured by Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation on Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) basis for Micro and Small Enterprises.
7.1.9 The Critical Industrial Infrastructure Fund will be created to provide critical industrial infrastructure and develop end-to-end connectivity. Cooperative industrial estates will be developed as per requirement through the Industrial Infrastructure Fund.
Page 26 of 80
# Page 27
7.1.10 The land reserved for public health facilities in Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation industrial estates will be developed by the respective departments. The ESIC Hospital facility will be provided by the Public Health Department as per the demands and requirements of the concerned industrial associations.
7.1.11.Additional floor area index (IT& ITeS, Biotechnology, Garmenting, Gems& Jewellery, Logistics& Warehousing) land admissible for respective sectors as per respective policies of the State Government.
The change of use will be approved as per requirement with the permission of the state government.
7.1.12 The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) may acquire land free of cost from the State Government or State Government undertakings, if such land is required for planned industrial development. will be made available).
7.2 Leveraging Special Projects: The Industries Department, Government of Maharashtra will promote setting up of industrial estates along the route of important projects declared as special projects by the Central/ State Government such as Maharashtra Samruddhi Highway, Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor, Sagarmala, Bharatmala etc.
7.2.1 Maharashtra Samruddhi Highway: Maharashtra Samruddhi Highway is a 700 km long super communications expressway connecting Nagpur and Mumbai. The route passes through 10 major districts and 14 other impact districts. Industrial areas will be planned at 20 places along the expressway. These industrial areas will bring about a paradigm shift in the economy in rural areas of the impact areas. Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be the planning authority for industrial planning for these nodes. The expressway will greatly reduce travel time. Nagpur-Wardha is planned to be developed as a major logistics corridor along with logistics and warehousing hubs on this route. This route will also be developed as an Electric Vehicle (EV) Expressway by setting up charging stations on this route.
The Samruddhi Highway will connect the state of Maharashtra with the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor and the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor. Parts of Maharashtra will be connected with this corridor and JNPT, the country's largest container port. This will increase the export and import of the country.
Page 27 of 80
# Page 28
7.2.2 Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC): DMIC is a Central Government infrastructure project, which aims to develop new industrial towns as Smart Cities and develop" Global Industrial Manufacturing and Trade Hubs" incorporating high technology in infrastructure. Two such projects are being planned in Maharashtra.
Shendra Bidkin Industrial Area (SBIA)- The total area of the project is about 84 sq. km. I am The existing industrial area near Aurangabad as well as the existing airport and railway are suitable for export-oriented business.
Dighi Port Industrial Area (DPIA)- The total area to be developed in the project is 253 sq.km. I am This node is a port, trade and industrial hub, which will partly boost Mumbai's global trade, commerce and industry, making it the western gateway to India.
7.2.3 Sagarmala and Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs): Coastal development and industrialization of ports and coastal
Sagarmala project is an ambitious project of the Government of India for development of ports along with community development. Out of the total 14 Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs), two CEZs namely North Konkan (JNPT Link Port) and South Konkan (Dighi and Jaigarh Port) are planned to be developed in the State of Maharashtra. The State Government will provide necessary support to various Coastal Economic Units (CEUs) to be set up in area specific dedicated industrial zones in the State CEZs.
7.3 Decisive Industrial Infrastructure Fund: In industrial areas outside the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) area, the lack of basic facilities such as end-to-end road connectivity, dedicated power lines, water supply, etc. creates a large number of bottlenecks for industries.
There is a huge demand for funds for such basic infrastructure. No budget has been allocated for this. In view of the requirement of such funds and its visible impact, the Critical Industrial Infrastructure Fund (CIIF) created during the Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2013 has been enhanced to Rs. 1000 crore will continue with the increased corpus. The funds will be used for providing last mile connectivity and for creation and upgradation of industrial infrastructure such as power networks, sewage treatment plants, roads, etc. Page 28 of 80 for the exportable component of the Fund, industrial clusters and industrial parks
# Page 29
It will be used to solve problems related to infrastructure. As mentioned in the previous policy for the infrastructure and facilities of industrial clusters and various industrial parks, Rs. The fund will be sanctioned and managed by a committee headed by the Chief Secretary. The State Government will provide funds in a phased manner through budgetary provision during the policy period through expenditure on the programme.
7.4. Promote private industrial infrastructure development.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation has insufficient land in the industrial area, resulting in unplanned industrial development in many areas. To rationalize this and encourage local entrepreneurship, development of private industrial estates with focus on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
The aim of the government is to attract private investment.
7.4.1 To encourage private sector participation in the development of industrial infrastructure, projects will be supported to establish industrial parks associated with the thrust sectors identified in this policy.
7.4.2 Preference will be given to industrial estates developed for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by women/ SC/ ST entrepreneurs and additional 100% financial assistance will be provided. The funds for this will be provided by the Social Justice Department and the Tribal Development Department.
7.4.3 Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be the planning authority for these private industrial estates.
To promote 8 thrust sectors.
The State Government has accorded priority to the following sectors to generate employment and shift industrial development towards emerging high technology sectors. Projects in thrust sectors will be given priority in allocation of space and special incentives will also be provided.
8.1 ELECTRIC VEHICLES (PRODUCTION, INFRASTRUCTURE AND MAINTENANCE) Electric vehicles (EVs) are the future of sustainable development in the face of declining oil reserves and increasing pollution. The Government of India has launched the National Electric Mobility Plan (NEMP), an e-mobility programme, to promote the use of electric vehicles by creating an ecosystem of electric vehicle manufacturers, vehicle charging infrastructure developers, vehicle fleet operators, service providers, etc. 25 million on the road.
Page 29 of 80
# Page 30
Considering the vehicles and the auto industry is an important industry, the Maharashtra government has decided to produce and use more and more electric vehicles in the state.
Therefore, the state government has identified electric vehicles and their manufacturing, infrastructure and maintenance as priority sectors. The state government has announced the Electric Vehicles and Related Infrastructure Policy-2018 to promote this sector.
8.2 AIR AND DEFENSE PRODUCTION INDUSTRY India is the largest importer of arms in the world. (As of March 2018)
India accounted for 12 per cent of global arms imports during 2013-2017. So, there is a ready market for the aviation and defence industries. India's defence spending has increased by 231% in the last decade. 7.74 lakh crore (US$ 120 billion). With various weapon manufacturing plants in Maharashtra, the state government is all set to leverage the investments in the aviation and defence industry in India, which will give a boost to the Centre's" Make in India" initiative. Accordingly, the state government has identified the space and defence industry as a priority sector. The state has also announced the Space and Defence Production Policy-2018.
8.3 INDUSTRY 4.0 (AI, 3D Printing, Cloud, Machine Learning, Micro Technology, etc.) The fourth industrial revolution will be driven by the rapidly improving IT infrastructure. Industry 4.0 is the fourth industrial revolution in the world, which is the convergence of world industry, IoT, kiosks, embedded technology, three dimensional printing, artificial intelligence, machine learning, micro-technology, and other technologies. Developed countries like Germany, Japan, South Korea and the United States have also started implementing plans based on Industry 4.0. To ensure that the domestic industry remains globally competitive, the State Government will encourage investment in technologies in Industry 4.0, including through joint ventures.
8.4 Boost to Integrated Data Centre Parks (IDCP) There is a huge demand for data storage in India. Mumbai's geographical location, excellent power infrastructure and undersea data cables have the potential to become one of the largest data storage hubs globally. Promoting the construction of integrated data center parks
Page 30 of 80
# Page 31
It needs to be encouraged. The Tier-4 data centre will be set up by the developer company and various other companies will use the storage space.
Companies using integrated data centre parks and data storage space set up by private developers will be given financial incentives under this collective incentive scheme.
States will be eligible for GST refunds and other incentives for a maximum period of 10 years (excluding investments in land and buildings). Developer companies in the Tier-4 category whose minimum investment in the first five (5) Integrated Data Centre Parks during the policy period is Rs. 1500 crore will be eligible for the above incentives. The State IT& ITeS Policy-2015 will be considered to have made necessary improvements in the integrated data centre scenario.
8.5 PRODUCTION OF TEXTILE MACHINES Maharashtra has been a leader in the textile industry due to cotton production. A large number of textile products are imported. Textile machinery manufacturing industries will be given priority as thrust sector and appropriate incentives will be provided.
8.6 Biotechnology, Medical Diagnostic Equipment Maharashtra intends to take advantage of the advantageous position of the State in the field of high technology manufacturing and become a leader in the production of biotechnology and medical diagnostic equipment. The key initiatives taken in this area are as follows:
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will set up dedicated biotechnology and medical diagnostics manufacturing parks at suitable locations in the state (Nashik, Pune, Aurangabad and Nagpur, among others).
Dedicated infrastructure like Common Effluent Treatment Plants, Testing and Certification Laboratories will be set up for manufacturing of biotech and medical diagnostic equipment.
A manufacturing park will be set up for biotechnology and medical diagnostic equipment.
8.7 AGRICULTURE AND FOOD PROCESSING GARDENS (II& III Food Processing Parks only) There is a huge scope for employment generation in the agriculture and food processing industry, especially in the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) across the State. The secondary and tertiary food processing units have huge potential for growth. Therefore, the state government will try to set up mini food processing parks in every district. Small food processing gardens should be set up on at least 10 acres of land. Aggregation of land of nearby farmers for development of mini food processing parks will be allowed.
Page 31 of 80
# Page 32
These parks will be provided with necessary infrastructure dedicated to specific commodity based units. Special incentives will be given to industries in this sector.
8.8 IT& ITeS Maharashtra is home to more than 1200 command developing units and accounts for 30% of the country's total command export. Pune and Mumbai are the major centers of IT and IT enabled services industry in the state. Information about Maharashtra
To make it one of the most preferred destinations for investment in the technology sector, the state has declared it as a thrust sector and also announced a separate incentive scheme.
8.9 The domestic demand for Electronic System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) and Semiconductor Fabrication (FAB) electronics hardware products is increasing in the country every year and
Most of this demand is met through imports. Due to this, this thrust area also has huge potential for development and huge employment opportunities. The State is all set to take advantage of the Central Government's stated objectives of manufacturing electronics goods in India itself as a conducive environment exists in the State for the electronics hardware industry. industry for the state.
Keeping in view other general importance, the State Government has announced a special policy" Maharashtra Electronics Policy-2016."
8.10 LOGISTICS AND WARHAUSING The logistics and warehousing industry in India is growing at a rate of 10% and is expected to touch Rs. 13.21 lakh crore (US$ 205 billion). Due to the strategic location of the state, it is connected to national and international levels through ports and airports.
The state is an ideal location for the growth of the logistics and warehousing industry. Along with the logistics and warehousing hubs on these routes, a major logistics corridor is planned on the Nagpur-Wardha route. The State Government has announced a special policy titled" Logistics Park Policy 2018."
8.11 Green Energy/ Biofuel Production
There are more than 25 million vehicles on the road in Maharashtra and this figure is close to the national average.
It will increase in the future. As a result, there is a need to provide necessary support to promote production of green energy/ biofuels to overcome the rising carbon emissions and concerns about rising oil imports. Switch to renewable energy sources such as biofuels (including ethanol), biomass from all crops, etc.
With the environment becoming clean, the dependence of the state on oil imports will also be reduced.
Page 32 of 80
# Page 33
In this regard, the state government will allow the cultivation and harvesting of non-edible oilseeds suitable for bio-fuels in tribal and undeveloped forest areas. Therefore, biofuel/ green energy production has been identified as a priority sector. The state government will give more incentives to this sector.
8.12. Sports and Gym Equipment Manufacturing Due to rapid improvement in the economic situation, increase in the balance of income and change in the approach towards fitness, the demand for goods and services related to sports and fitness schools has increased in the country. This has opened up new business opportunities for manufacturing sports and gym equipment. This labour-intensive industry provides employment to 5.0 lakh people in India. The state government will encourage the production of sports and gym equipment.
8.13 Manufacturing of Nuclear Power Plant Equipment- The Make in India programme aims to manufacture nuclear power plant equipment in India. The equipment for the second phase of the Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project will be supplied from here. The Government of Maharashtra will promote the production of nuclear power equipment in this highly niche segment.
8.14 Mineral and Forest Based Industries- Forest Products and Minerals in Industries to promote employment generation in the State
In order to promote the use/ value addition of products, plantation based on forest products, mineral products and setting up of agro industries/ allied activities will be encouraged, especially in forest rich and mineral rich areas. These incentives will be applicable only for mineral-based industries under the jurisdiction of the State Government.
Since the industries are located in tribal areas, funds from the Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) will be used for infrastructure. Non-tribal entrepreneurs/ industries providing 90% employment to tribal persons during the incentive period will be eligible for the incentive rebate. The percentage of employment for tribal persons after enjoying the incentive period will be 60%.
8.15 The Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) will have the power to decide which industries will contribute to the industrialization of the state in the coming days and which industry sector should be given the status of niche/ sunrise sector and should be called thrust sector.
Page 33 of 80
# Page 34
9. Incentives to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and Small Scale Industries (SMEs)- MSMEs are the backbone of the State's economy. Maharashtra has more than 3 million micro, small and medium enterprises, the highest in the country.
Maharashtra has the highest number of micro, small and medium enterprises in the country contributing more than 80 per cent of the total employment. local entrepreneurship and the use of local resources.
Micro, small and medium enterprises are the best medium to generate employment. About 40% of exports are from Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. Therefore, with a view to incentivize these activities for industrial development and employment generation, especially for small industrial units, the limit of Fixed Capital Investment (FCI) investment has been increased to Rs. The following policy measures are being approved separately to provide incentives to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
9.1 District-wise assessment of potential Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises- To study the production potential of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and to determine and implement the strategy, the State Government will conduct a survey in all the districts of Maharashtra and conduct a study based on Geographical Indication (GI). Geometrically based products are not only a legacy of our rich tradition but also a testament to the skills and wisdom of rural artisans, craftsmen, farmers and small artisans. It is not only our duty to preserve such rich traditions and give them a place in the industrial policy, but it will also be a part of Make in India. The project will be implemented by the Maharashtra State Small Industries Development Corporation (MSSIDC).
9.2 Launch of New Flagship Scheme- Chief Minister Employment Generation Scheme (CMEGP) The Chief Minister Employment Generation Scheme (CMEGP) will be launched for unemployed youth. The objective of the new scheme is to motivate the local youth towards self-employment by providing easy and simple financing from the bank. The scheme will be applicable to all segments of the manufacturing and services sector.
The Industries Department of the Government of Maharashtra will be the apex agency to implement the scheme. Under the scheme, eligible persons in the age group of 18-45 years will be trained and encouraged for self-employment and the equity capital for the same will be converted into back-end subsidy which will be given as per the State Government Bank Loan. The project cost is Rs. 50 lakh and Rs. It is limited to Rs 10 lakh. The scheme will be implemented through the Directorate of Industries and the Khadi and Village Industries Board. The State Government will provide financial assistance to the programme. A special program as needed
Page 34 of 80
# Page 35
Funding will be provided through the Tribal Solutions Project (TSP) or SCP. The salient features of the programme are as follows: The salient features of the programme are as follows: Incentives for self-employment- at least 1,00,000 micro-enterprises during the policy period.
Creation of Employment Opportunities- Minimum of 10 Lakhs during the policy period.
Entrepreneurship Development Programme for Youth- 2,00,000 youth during the policy period.
Financial assistance through Grant Scheme 15% to 35% of the approved project cost.
The scheme covers the manufacturing and business/ service sectors.
F. Promotion of rural and semi-urban economy.
9.3 Institutional Support to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Micro, small and medium enterprises need support for technology adoption and dissemination, market testing, management techniques etc. For this, the state government will help in strengthening the existing relevant institutions in Maharashtra.
The State Government will support the Centre of Excellence (CoE)/ research facilities for development/ adoption of technologies that are of critical importance to the industry.
The" Centre of Excellence" (CoE)/ research facilities will have plug and play incubation facilities and arrangements for counselling as well as training.
The State Government will provide support for institutional support for development of sector specific skills and application of new/ latest technologies or products.
The State Government will organise workshops under the Institute for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises to create awareness about new technologies and their adoption.
The State Government will take initiative for mutual cooperation/ understanding of world class Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises among the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the State.
9.4 CLUSTER PROMOTION Maharashtra is the leading state in the country in industrial cluster development. It is observed that cluster based incentives are sustainable, cost effective and comprehensive measures to improve the competitiveness of MSMEs.
Financial incentives will be provided by the State Governments for the approved Common Facility Centres in the States, excluding A and B regions.
The limit of financial assistance for Group B development will be increased from the existing Rs 5 crore to Rs 10 crore.
Financial assistance will be provided to Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) set up for this purpose. The State Level Steering Committee will evaluate and approve the proposals received.
Page 35 of 80
# Page 36
20% of the area in the new industrial estates of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be reserved for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. Out of this, 20 per cent of the area will be reserved for SC/ ST entrepreneurs and 5 per cent for women entrepreneurs and industrial units of women self-help groups. For the rehabilitation of ex-servicemen, 2 per cent of the land area will be reserved for providing self-employment opportunities.
Common Facility Centres (CFCs) established under the Central/ State Government's cluster development schemes will be considered as industrial activity.
9.5. Provide access to public funds to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
Many micro, small and medium enterprises in the state have the potential to expand on a large scale. However, lack of funds has limited its expansion.
The SME Exchange was established in 2012, keeping in mind the growth potential among them. The exchange has benefited in raising public funds in the state. The CAGR of SMEs was around 40% in the last financial year.
Micro, small and medium enterprises can now receive public funds through listing on stock exchanges. The State Government plans to support Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by providing financial assistance to the first 250 SMEs of Maharashtra to be listed on SME Exchange, Mumbai during the present Industrial Policy period.
9.6 To resolve the problems of insolvency and debt of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, the Government of Maharashtra will establish a regional division-wise cell under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 to address the problems of insolvency and debt of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and to guide the concerned stakeholders. For this purpose, the Maharashtra State Small Industries Development Corporation will be strengthened and empowered.
9.7 Financial Incentives to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Maharashtra is one of the most attractive states in the country.
9.7.1 In accordance with this Policy, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) are defined as defined in the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Act, 2006 by the Central Government and as small enterprises having fixed capital investment of Rs. 50 crores.
9.7.2 Specific incentives, not exceeding a certain limit, will be provided to eligible Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises through the Basket of Incentives.
Page 36 of 80
# Page 37
Table No. Eligibility Criteria for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Maximum limit for Fixed Capital Investment (Rs. crore)                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Limit on percentage of fixed capital investment                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Period of Eligibility (Years) |
| A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | As per this policy, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall be defined as defined in the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Act, 2006 of the Central Government and as small enterprise units having fixed capital investment up to Rs. |
| B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 30%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 7                             |
| a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 40%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 7                             |
| d.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 50%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 10                            |
| D+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | The 60%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 10                            |
| Vidarbha, Marathwada, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg and Dhule.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 80%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 10                            |
| Non-industry districts, Naxal affected districts* and Aspirational districts                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 100%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 10                            |
| As per the Government Resolution No. 2013/ 2013 (CR-54)/ Industry-8 dated 1st April 2013 issued by the Department of Industries, Energy and Labour, Government of Maharashtra, Naxal affected areas.' Aspirational districts like Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar. |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9.7.3 Additional support will be provided to eligible MSMEs in Agriculture and Food Processing Industries (only for secondary and tertiary processing industries and Farmer Producer Companies for production and processing purposes), Green Energy/ Biofuels and Industry 4.0.
9.7.4 (Excluding Category A) Power tariff concession to the newly eligible Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in Vidarbha, Marathwada, North Maharashtra, Naxalite affected areas, Aspirational Districts and Raigad, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg and Dhule districts will be limited to Rs.1/- per unit on the power consumed and Rs. 0.50 per unit for other areas (excluding Category A).
9.7.5 Interest subvention@ 5% per annum will be admissible to eligible units other than Class A units in proportion to the electricity consumed and the electricity bill paid during the year.
9.7.6 In addition to the above listed exemptions, eligible MSMEs will be allowed 100% waiver of stamp duty on acquisition of land (including lease deed and sale certificate) and term loans during the period of investment. However, in the A and B category, the concession will be given only to IT and allied industries and biotech units in the IT and Biotechnology Park. The eligible industry units under the Collective Incentive Scheme-2013 will also be eligible for stamp duty exemption for the period of their investment.
Page 37 of 80
# Page 38
9.7.7. Eligible Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises in C, D, D+ zones, Zero Industries and Naxalite affected zones and Aspirational Districts will be exempted from payment of electricity duty for the period of eligibility for Industrial Incentive Subsidy. 100% rebate in power tariff for a period of seven years will be provided to MSMEs in the IT and Biotechnology sector in the A and B segments which are 100% export oriented.
9.7.8 All the schemes of the Central Government and the State Governments for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises will be linked to this policy.
9.7.9 Marketing Support Scheme will be formulated to support the marketing activities of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. SC/ ST women entrepreneurs will be provided financial assistance and encouraged to participate in national and international fairs to improve the competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises in marketing at national and international levels.
9.7.10 Separate incentives (in addition to incentives under the collective incentive scheme) will be allowed for empowering Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and promoting quality competitiveness, Zero Defect Zero Effect (ZED Scheme), R& D, technology upgradation, water and power conservation, clean manufacturing solutions and credit rating.
9.7.11 The Industrial Development Subsidy to eligible MSME units will be based on the Gross State Goods and Services Tax (SGST) paid by the unit on the first sale of eligible products which have been billed and delivered to a single entity in the State.
Attracting investment in large, large and ultra-large projects.
Maharashtra has the largest number of projects in the country. It is well known that the State has benefited from large, mega and mega projects generating huge revenue and employment. Further, the policy has made concerted efforts to take advantage of this to achieve balanced and inclusive regional development.
Page 38 of 80
# Page 39
10.1 LARGE INDUSTRIES 10.1.1 LARGE INDUSTRIES are defined as those units which meet the minimum threshold of fixed capital investment or direct employment as given in the table below. The financial assistance given to big industries will be given in such a way that maximum industries will be established in the underdeveloped parts of the state. The financial incentives to large enterprises will not exceed the limit of the total amount in their basket of incentives.
Table 2- Eligibility Criteria for Large Enterprises
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Taluka/ Division Category                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Minimum Fixed Capital Investment (Rs. crore) | Minimum direct employment generation (NUMBER) |
| A and B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 750                                          | 1000                                          |
| a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 500                                          | 750                                           |
| d.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 250                                          | 500                                           |
| D+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 150                                          | 400                                           |
| Marathwada, Vidarbha, Sindhudurg, Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg districts.                                                                                                                                                                          | 100                                          | 300                                           |
| Non-industry districts, Naxal-affected districts and aspirational districts                                                                                                                                                                    | 100                                          | 250                                           |
| Aspirational districts (Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar) as per Government Resolution No. PSI-2013/ (CR-54)/ Industry-8 dated 1st April 2013 issued by the Department of Industries, Energy and Labour, Government of Maharashtra. |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Rs. 50 crore over and above the fixed capital investment limit. Industrial Development Subsidy on State Goods and Services Tax (SGST) payable on first sale in the State up to a limit of 40% shall be admissible to eligible industry units having fixed capital investment up to the minimum investment limit for large industries prescribed in Section 2 of the Act. However, these incentives will not be applicable for category A and B.
Additional incentives will be given to large industries in the thrust sector.
(b) Industrial development subsidy to eligible large industrial units on the first sale of eligible products by the unit which is a single entity in the State to build and deliver
The total amount paid will be based on the State Goods and Services Tax (SGST). Incentives will be given to large units on a" first-come-first-serve" basis.
c.In addition to the above-listed exemption, eligible large enterprises are allowed to invest during the period
Time limit for acquisition of land (including lease deed and sale certificate)
100% discount on stamp duty on loans will be allowed. But in section A and B of this page 39 of 80
# Page 40
The concession will be given only to the IT and allied industries and biotech units of the IT and Biotechnology Park. The eligible industry units under the Collective Incentive Scheme-2013 will also be eligible for stamp duty exemption for the period of their investment.
Eligible large industries in D, C, D+ zones, zero industries and Naxalite affected zones and aspirational districts will be exempted from payment of electricity duty for the period of eligibility for Industrial Incentive subsidy. 100% rebate in power tariff for a period of seven years will be provided to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) in the IT and Biotechnology sector.
The eligible units applying for incentives in the first year of the policy will be given a full basket of incentives depending on the location of the unit and the respective regional division.
The basket of incentives will be reduced by 5% for each year if the entity applies in the second or subsequent years of the policy period. This provision will not apply to industries located in thrust areas.
Further support will be provided to eligible large agro and food processing industries (for manufacturing/ processing purposes only in case of secondary and tertiary processing units and farmer producer companies), large industries in the areas of green energy, biofuels and Industry 4.0.
The total financial incentives provided by various departments or agencies of the State Government shall not exceed the Industrial Incentive Subsidy (IPS) limit (as a percentage of fixed capital investment) as defined by the State Government.
The major components will be incentivized to promote quality competitiveness, R& D, technology enhancement, water and energy conservation, clean manufacturing solutions and credit rating.
Page 40 of 80
# Page 41
10.2 Large-scale and ultra-large projects
10.2.1 Minimum limits for fixed capital investment or direct employment as given in the table below
Completing industries will be classified as large/ very large projects.
Table 3- Eligibility Criteria for Distribution of Concessions to Large and Micro Enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| The type of industry                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Taluka/ Division Category | Minimum Fixed Capital Investment (Rs. crore) | Minimum direct employment generation (number of persons) |
| A large-scale project                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | A and B                   | 1500                                         | 2000                                                     |
| a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 1000                      | 1500                                         |
| d.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 750                       | 1000                                         |
| D+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 500                       | 750                                          |
| Sindhudurg, Ratnagiri, Raigad, Palghar and Sindhudurg districts have been affected by floods.                                                                                                                                                  | 350                       | 500                                          |
| Non-industry districts, Naxalite affected areas* and Aspirational districts**                                                                                                                                                                  | 200                       | 350                                          |
| Big project                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | for the entire State.     | 4000                                         | 4000                                                     |
| Aspirational districts of Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar as per Government Resolution No.PSI-2013/ (CR-54)/ Industry-8 dated 1st April 2013 issued by the Department of Industries, Energy and Labour, Government of Maharashtra. |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It provides that:
(a) Full coverage of eligible jobs for very large/ large scale industries as per the criteria of employment.
You will need to keep your current job throughout the year. in any year's
If the employment criterion is not met during the period, then the industrial incentive support for that year will not be admissible.
(b) The minimum direct employment prescribed in the above table shall be at the commencement of commercial production.
Must be created within 3 years from date.
c) Investment made for captive power projects will not be considered for eligibility criteria as mega/ super mega projects.
d) 100% captive process vendor investment as part of permissible fixed capital investment.
can be considered. However, captive process vendor investment is a huge project.
Therefore, eligibility will not be considered for consideration.
c) Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation in the area for large/ very large projects.
Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation to provide land on priority
The policy will continue.
Page 41 of 80
# Page 42
10.2.2 The High Powered Committee constituted under Government Resolution IDL-1005/ PR No.119/ U-8, dated 02.06.2005 under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary will approve certain customized packages to be given to mega and ultra mega projects. The Board of Directors of the Company was constituted vide Government Resolution No.IDL-1097/ (13478)/ U-8 dated 18th January, 1998 and reconstituted vide Government Resolution No.IDL1004/ PR No. 318/ U-8 dated 24th December, 2004. The Cabinet Sub-Committee on Industries, chaired by the Chief Minister, will approve customized packages for large and ultra-large projects.
10.2.3 crore in the State. In large and ultra-large projects with fixed capital investment of more than Rs 500 crore, the state government will have 9% equity participation through the Maharashtra Sales Tax Bond Authority. The partnership will be in lieu of incentives received for these projects under the Industrial Policy-2019 to 2024. The equity participation will be in the form of" equity" only. The shares and dividends will be issued in the name of Maharashtra Sales Tax Securities Authority. If the state government wants to sell its shares, the promoter of the industrial unit concerned will have the right of first refusal that it will be sold only at the current market price.
So that the acquisition due to business competition/ jealousy/ business rivalry is avoided.
10.2.4 Large and MASSIVE projects to be promoted under the Collective Incentive Scheme by the State Government to the local people as prescribed by the State Government.
Employment policy must be followed. If not, the incentives will be reduced.
10.2.5 The Government will approve customized packages for projects of high importance (whether large or non-large projects) on a case to case basis. The High Powered Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary will recommend to the Cabinet Sub-Committee certain customized packages to be given to such projects.
Incentives/ concessions are provided to Micro, Small, Medium, Large, Large and Micro Enterprises in the State by other Departments of the State Government, in addition to the Collective Incentive Scheme.
The financial returns/ incentives to the units from all sources shall be admissible only to the extent of 100% of the total fixed capital investment made by the unit.
Page 42 of 80
# Page 43
11. Support to Green Industrialization Maharashtra is a leading state in taking initiatives for sustainable development and it promotes green industrialization, which will reduce the adverse impact on the environment.
Greening the process of water, energy and environment conservation for eligible industries
Industrial development will be supported. Waste Management System (Waste Water and Sewerage)
The projects will include processing plants, pollution control systems/ equipments, health and safety systems/ equipments, water conservation/ storage systems/ equipments and captive renewable energy generation plants. the Central Government and the State Government
Grants/ financial assistance received from the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board, which is under the control of the Authority, will be given. A committee headed by Development Commissioner (Industries) will approve the concessions.
b Captive solar power generation plants will be considered permissible for capital investment exemption. At least 80% of the power generated from this plant is consumed by the same unit, which can be considered as a captive solar power plant.
Promotion of research and development (R& D) R& D is to improve the productivity and economic progress of a sector.
It's important. Strong R& D infrastructure is the key to sustainable development
Contributes and creates new employment opportunities for the scientific community.
A country like India has a high potential for intellectual property. to prevent brain damage, and
There is a special need for industrial research to make full use of the existing talent.
It is equally important to protect the intellectual property rights of the researchers. Research and
Further initiatives will be taken to promote development.
Stand alone/ combined facilities in R& D of eligible industrial unit will be considered as part of fixed capital investment for availing financial incentives.
Special funds will be provided to support industrial R& D activities.
Promotion by industry and higher technical education in universities such as centres of excellence, technical institutes, etc., and the contribution of relevant departments such as universities, etc. will be taken into account. Linkages between academia and industry will be encouraged through universities, centres of excellence, institutes of technology, etc.
Industrial enterprises, units and private individuals will be eligible for financial assistance for registration of patents related to the manufacturing sector.
Page 43 of 80
# Page 44
In view of the involvement of innovative technologies, financial support will also be provided to R& D units undertaking joint ventures.
13. Boost to creation of ecosystem for Startups The new industrial policy will provide support to the state government as part of the policy to create a conducive environment for entrepreneurship by providing necessary infrastructure to innovative start-ups. New entrepreneurs will be supported with financial assistance, counselling and adequate measures will be taken to facilitate exchange of ideas.
Appropriate steps will be taken to encourage start-ups from the college level in coordination with the government, industry and academia.
Industry/ business mentors will be provided to emerging technology based startups such as Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, Internet of Things, Nanotechnology, etc.
The State shall establish and promote incubators for start-ups for the open category and SC/ ST category and women entrepreneurs in general. The incubators will be set up in collaboration with world-class universities and will be incentivized with necessary financial and administrative support.
14. Resolving/ Revival of Assets of Closed Units Initiatives taken to organise programmes like Make in India and Magnetic Maharashtra have resulted in inflow of investments in the State in the last few years and an investment of Rs. Considering the target of Rs 10 lakh crore investment, the state needs to have adequate land availability for that investment to materialise. The availability of land has become poor, especially in the developed parts of the state. Keeping this in mind, the government is providing financial incentives to industries to invest in underdeveloped areas. Apart from this, the state also intends to use the lands of industries that have been closed or have become unviable.
Government dues and penalties thereon, dues of financial institutions, dues of workers and their issues and the indifference of the companies to dispose of the said lands is impractical/ closed
Land acquisition is a major impediment to industrial growth.
The government has decided to address this problem through the following policy measures.
Page 44 of 80
# Page 45
14.1 VISHAL ABHAY SCHEME The State Government will bring out a Special Abhaaya Scheme for payment of Government dues and penalties to all closed and unviable industries, including all Government agencies.
The interest and/ or penalty will be fully waived by making a lump sum payment of the government issue. The scheme will be operational for a limited period. Also, an online website displaying the government dues of these industries will be made operational for the purpose.
The repayment of dues to all financial institutions (including the Maharashtra State Financial Corporation) shall be subject to the directions of the Reserve Bank of India. However, the state government will coordinate with financial institutions for early repayment of the loan.
The Maharashtra State Financial Corporation will announce an attractive one-time repayment scheme (OTS).
14.2 With a view to achieve the said objective of freeing the land of closed industrial enterprises, the units which are closed for the last 5 years and have contiguous land of 20,000 sq.m. in the industrial area of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be allowed to set up industrial clusters.
A special initiative will be taken to reuse the land. Industrial land use will be in the ratio of 60:40 i.e. 60 percent industrial and 40 percent
Supplementary services shall be permitted in the area of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation.
Without providing non-fiscal incentives for the purpose of development of the site, the developer will not come forward. Therefore, a 4-member committee is being appointed under the chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) to formulate the criteria for additional mat area index, including the cost of levying. In this
The committee will comprise Secretary (Finance), Secretary (Expenditure), Development Commissioner (Industries) and Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
The relaxation of the Chatai Area Index will be given for a limited period for the speedy implementation of the redevelopment project. The project is to be completed within a period of seven years.
Page 45 of 80
# Page 46
15. Walk to Work concept A Satellite offices will be developed in the State to decongest the city by promoting the concept of" Walk to Work." Industries will be encouraged to develop residential facilities for employees within a radius of 5 km from the place of work.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be the planning authority for such areas and other government agencies will be involved in the development. Development of the area
Without providing non-fiscal incentives with the aim of becoming, the developer will not come forward. Therefore, a 4-member committee is being appointed under the chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) to formulate the criteria for additional mat area index, including the cost of levying. The Secretary (1),
Secretary (Finance/ Expenditure), Development Commissioner (Industries) and Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
(a) will be included.
c In residential areas, cinema halls, public auditoriums and multiplexes, hospitals, nursing homes, schools and colleges, training institutes and their affiliates
Commercial purposes such as hostels will be allowed. Only polluting industries and services will be allowed.
If the developer does not comply with the above criteria, then the Congestion Tax Tax may be applied to it in the future.
16. Ease of Doing Business in the State has been demonstrated by the Ease of Doing Business (EoDB) with clear, fast and hassle-free rules for business. The following aspects are being incorporated to create an easy business environment.
16.1 MAHARASHTRA Empowering Industry, Trade and Investment Cell (Maitri) Maitri is an initiative of the State Government to facilitate ease of doing business.
It has been effective in granting clearances/ permissions/ licenses to numerous activities since inception. Maitri has changed the role of the government from a regulator to a facilitator. Government to promote industry, trade and commerce considering new opportunities in the field of trade, commerce and commerce
Maitri will be given autonomous status for effective implementation of the initiatives taken.
Page 46 of 80
# Page 47
The scope of friendship will also be expanded to attract global investment. As an autonomous body, Maitri will represent Maharashtra on the national and global stage. Maitri will work closely with national and international industry associations/ forums by organizing and participating in various summits, fairs, exhibitions, road shows etc. This will be a platform for the promotion of the brand" Magnetic Maharashtra."
All the services, permissions and permissions related to the state government required to set up and operate industries in Maharashtra will be provided through the Maitri website. Friendship
The website will have information about the resources of the state, infrastructure, process of setting up industries, resolution of grievances and rules/ government regulations/ orders etc.
(b) to provide all services and clearances within a specified period of time, shall be enabled by giving statutory powers and means to Maitri. Maitri will be given more autonomy to provide timely approvals and services to investors. The contribution of the initial fund will be borne by the concerned Departments/ Boards/ Corporations/ Authorities e.g. The Maharashtra State Industrial Development Corporation (MSIDC), Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB), Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Corporation (MHADA), City Industrial Development Corporation Limited (CIDCO), etc.
The Maitri Cell will coordinate with industry associations for the Ease of Doing Business initiative.
Friendly rooms will also be operationalized at the zonal level to make the Maitri facility and handholding setup more effective. The expenditure on complaints received at the Friendship level will be borne by the concerned department.
The e-Development Commissioner (Industries) will take cognizance of the difficulties being faced in this regard and he will be the authority to implement the legal process.
Special Facilitation Cell for promoting/ mentoring entrepreneurship among SC, ST and women entrepreneurs to be set up at MaitriKastha
will be done. Necessary administrative expenses for this cell will be met jointly by the Social Justice Department and the Tribal Development Department.
16.2 Regulatory Simplification The process of obtaining environmental clearances will be simplified.
The process of approving building plans for industries will be rationalized uniformly across the state.
Page 47 of 80
# Page 48
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will be declared as the special planning authority for industrial areas having an area of more than 10 acres, except urban local body areas.
In the industrial area of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation, only Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will act as an interface for the tax purposes of the local body.
Appellate powers will be given to the Friendship Cell under the Service Act Act of the State.
Also, a separate law will be enacted for the effective functioning of the Friendship Cell.
17.1 Administrative Cell to Support Trade and Commerce Considering the importance of the trade and commerce sector of the State in generating employment and contributing to the economy, a separate cell/ office will be created under the Department of Industries to promote trade and commerce and to assist in its implementation.
A separate cell will be created in the Directorate of Industries.
17.2 Establishment of Global Investment Promotion Council In order to attract global industrial investment, the State Government has taken several initiatives for investment promotion and facilitation. State to provide single window clearance/ licenses to entrepreneurs to be issued by various government agencies
The window is already installed under the scheme of friendship.
The state government has taken steps to take advantage of the interest shown by global investors to invest. Global Investment Promotion Council to be set up under the chairmanship of Chief Minister
The summit will create a strong network of entrepreneurs from across the world to attract investments in various sectors in the state. In the future, the conference will establish bilateral relations with countries in the United States, Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Africa, etc.
The Global Investment Promotion Council will take various initiatives to attract global investment in the state as follows.
To identify and select investment opportunities in the target sector globally.
Establishing bilateral relations with industrially rich countries to promote global investment in the state.
Organizing and participating in promotional events at local and international level to attract global investment to the State.
Page 48 of 80
# Page 49
Organizing G2G and G2B meetings for global investors.
Participation in trade fairs and road shows outside India.
Monitoring, follow-up and hand-holding of global leads for global investors.
To develop Brand Magnetic Maharashtra as an investment friendly destination through promotional advertisements.
Tracking of foreign investment in the country through the office of the Consulate General and in coordination with various government agencies.
Establishing a web-based portal for online tracking of investor interest.
The office of the Global Investment Promotion Council will be in Maitri.
Export Operations Initiative Maharashtra In the financial year 2017-18, Rs. India ranks first in exports with exports worth Rs. 4.49 lakh crore.
The graph is rising. Major exports from Maharashtra include gems and jewellery, engineering machinery and equipment, pharmaceuticals, information technology, iron and steel, automobiles and textiles.
It includes spare parts/ equipment, cotton and other agricultural products. A study report has been prepared to formulate an export strategy, which highlights the key sectors for export growth as textiles, engineering goods, agro products and processed foods, IT/ ITeS, auto and auto components, and pharmaceuticals and chemicals.
18.1 Establishment of Export Promotion Council The economic performance of a country in its global trade i.e.
It depends on exports. The state government has formed the Sectoral Export Promotion Council (SEPC). It is planned to set up a Maharashtra Export Promotion Council under the chairmanship of the Minister (Industries). The conference will encourage export-oriented industries and act as a platform to create awareness about competitiveness and promote export growth. The main activities of the conference will be as follows:
Interaction with global and local stakeholders, government mechanisms and international communities.
2. Preparation of a plan for export operations.
3. Resolving grievances of exportable units and providing export related information.
Page 49 of 80
# Page 50
4. Intellectual Information on Export: It will act as a think-tank for market intelligence, business intelligence, etc., related to the demand for export-oriented products, brands and services worldwide.
It will act as a facilitation agency for various assistance related to marketing to boost exports in the state.
(a) Mudra Development: Prominent brands of the state at domestic and global level will be developed for export products through promotional advertisements.
Export Awareness: Awareness about export potential and processes will be disseminated through training programmes, workshops, seminars, etc.
c) Organizing Exhibitions: Export Operations Providing support to exporters/ institutions/ boards/ EPCs for organizing exhibitions, symposiums, conferences etc (domestic and international).
d) Participation in Exhibitions: To encourage participation in domestic and international exhibitions, the State Government will provide assistance for expenditure incurred on participation in exhibitions.
will give.
Export Product Development: Export samples from Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) will be encouraged to be made available to foreign customers for export and new markets for new products.
(f) Export Excellence Awards: Exporters will be given awards for their outstanding performance in exports.
18.2 Export Infrastructure Support 1. Exhibition Convention Centres: Exhibition Convention Centres to be set up in different parts of the State to support regional export potential 2. End-to-end connectivity: End-to-end connectivity as essential physical infrastructure will be taken up on priority, mainly for agriculture related exports.
Testing and Quality Certification Laboratory: The State will support the establishment of testing and quality certification laboratory near the respective industrial clusters highlighted by the Government. Dedicated testing and quality certification laboratories will be set up in the export-oriented industrial clusters of Aurangabad, Nagpur, Nashik, Pune, Jalgaon, Solapur, Kolhapur, Sangli and Ratnagiri. Wherever possible, land will be made available through MIDC. 50% of the project cost with a project limit of Rs.5 crore
Page 50 of 80
# Page 51
The capital expenditure (excluding land) will be provided as grant-in-aid to the first 12 labs in the state during the policy period.
The State Government will support such projects through financial provision through schemes under the scheme.
18.3 Venture Capital Fund The State will provide funds to SIDBI for venture capital and the same will be provided as viability gap funding to the Export Oriented Units (EOUs).
19. Special Initiatives Various special initiatives are proposed to boost investment and employment in the State with a view to achieving regionally balanced and inclusive growth.
19.1 Special Incentives for Industries in Underdeveloped Districts of Maharashtra The following sectors will be given additional incentives under the policy to remove regional disparities in industrial development.
Aspirational districts (Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar).
Under the Collective Incentive Scheme-2019 in these districts, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, large and mega projects will be given more time to enjoy additional financial incentives and disincentives to attract investment and generate employment.
For large and mega projects based on employment, the minimum threshold for employment generation will be lower than in other areas.
19.2 Special incentives for industries in agriculture and food processing, green energy/ bio-fuels and Industry 4.0
Additional financial incentives of 20% will be provided to eligible industrial enterprises in agriculture and food processing (2nd and 3rd processing units and Farmer Producer Companies engaged in production and processing), green energy/ biofuels and Industry 4.0 and an additional eligibility period of two years will be admissible.
Page 51 of 80
# Page 52
19.3 Special Incentives for SC/ ST and Women Entrepreneurs Priority and additional financial assistance will be given to industrial estates developed or being developed for SC/ ST and women entrepreneurs.
In the new MUV Corporation areas, 20% of the area will be allotted to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on first priority. Also, 20% of the land will be allotted to SC/ ST and neo-Buddhist entrepreneurs, 5% to women entrepreneurs and industrial units of women self-help groups and 5% to Divyangs on first priority. Necessary changes will be made in the land allotment rules of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation so that the maximum zonal limit of allotment for this category is 25% in any new industrial area.
More financial assistance will be provided to entrepreneurs who set up incubators for entrepreneurs and women entrepreneurs belonging to SC/ ST communities.
Financial assistance will be provided to SC/ ST and women entrepreneurs to participate in the International Trade Fair. Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar SC/ ST Entrepreneurship Promotion Programme provides Venture Capital facility to SC/ ST entrepreneurs to promote their entrepreneurship and to facilitate setting up of their enterprises. The benefit of this venture capital facility will also be given to the newly established industries in front of the working industries.
Maharashtra is the most industrialized state in India and contributes 15% to the country's GDP. Various industries have contributed immensely to the industrial development of the state. In order to encourage their unparalleled contribution, the State proposes to honour such industries/ professionals every year with State Level Industry Awards. A new scheme will be formulated for these awards.
At present, the Industry Day is held in different districts of the state. The District Award Scheme will be suitably re-designed to encourage Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
Page 52 of 80
# Page 53
21. Empowerment of District Industries Centres.
The District Industries Centres (DICs) will be empowered to provide comprehensive information on various policies and schemes as well as to support marketing of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, trade and commerce, entrepreneurship development and revival of sick Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises at the district level. District Industries Centres (DICs) will be empowered by upgrading infrastructure, promoting digitization and undertaking capacity building activities. Suitable amendments will be made in the existing schemes under the District Industries Centre as per the need.
22. Apex Institute for Entrepreneurship Stimulation 22.1 Apex Institute for Entrepreneurship Stimulation A State of the Art Apex Entrepreneurship Development Institute in Maharashtra will be set up at Kalamboli G. Raigad in Mumbai Metropolitan Region on the site of Maharashtra State Small Industries Development Corporation. Its main characteristics are:
It will be the apex body in the State for promoting entrepreneurship and will organize other entrepreneurship development and management development programmes, sector specific skill development programmes, hands-on training and mentoring to promote new generation entrepreneurs and encourage start-ups.
The institute will have accommodation facilities for at least 200 trainees.
The institute will have cooperation agreements with national and international organizations and will be equipped with important facilities such as data center, e-e library, incubation center, exhibition and sales centers, etc.
Representation will be made on this body through the Maharashtra State Small Industries Development Corporation, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation, State Khadi Village Industries Board as well as the Department of Technical and Higher Education, Social Justice and Tribal Development Departments.
The existing structure of Maharashtra Centre for Entrepreneurship Development (MCED) will be used for this institute.
It will be an autonomous body under the supervision of Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary (Industries) and the Executive Council will be headed by Development Commissioner (Industries).
22.2 Establishment of well-equipped Exhibition and Convention Centres Exhibition and Convention Centres are being developed by State/ Local Authorities like Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation and Municipal Corporations. The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation will develop a well-equipped exhibition and convention centre. The State Government will provide necessary support for the development of well-equipped exhibition and convention centres.
Page 53 of 80
# Page 54
activities under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
As part of the goodwill gesture towards the community, the industrial units receiving incentives from the State Government under the Collective Incentive Scheme will spend at least 50% of their Corporate Social Responsibility funds for development works in the State.
Sector Specific Policies Over the years, Maharashtra has formulated/ modified sector specific policies which will be aligned with the new Industrial Policy.
(b) Notwithstanding any of the above, the State Government has made special provisions under various sectoral policies of the State. These policies are as follows:
Industrial Complexes with Flatted Sludge for Readymade Garment Manufacturing, Gems and Jewellery, Micro Electronics and Engineering Components Policy-2018 Fintech Policy-2018 Maharashtra Coir Policy-2018 Maharashtra Electric Vehicle Promotion Policy-2018 Maharashtra Logistics Park Policy-2018 6 Textile Policy-2018 7 Cloud Computing Policy-2018 8 Space and Defence Sector Manufacturing Policy-2018 9 Information Technology and Information Technology Assisted Services Policy-2015 10 Electronics Policy-2016 11 Retail Trade Policy-2016 12 Convenience concessions to developers while developing integrated industrial sector-2018 13 Bharat Ratna Dr.
The prevailing sectoral policies refer to the previous industrial policies of Maharashtra and the general rules of concessions under them or the concessions in the collective incentive scheme. On the publication of the said policy (Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019), unless otherwise specified, such references shall be deemed to be in conformity with the general rules or exemptions contained in the Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019.
Stamp duty concessions applicable to eligible industries under various policies (e. g., Integrated Industrial Sector Policy, Electronics Policy, etc.) will continue.
Page 54 of 80
# Page 55
Control and review of policy.
A Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary (Industries) will be functioning to review and implement the Industrial Policy-2019 of the State of Maharashtra effectively and to make necessary clarifications/ interpretations and to monitor the progress in its implementation. A Project Control Committee will be set up to implement the new Industrial Policy and to exercise control over its implementation. The project will be implemented by a committee.
Committee for Policy Revision: Maharashtra Industrial Policy-2019. In case of any doubt/ difficulty/ ambiguity, the Government is empowered to take a decision regarding such doubt/ difficulty/ ambiguity and make necessary changes in the Industrial Policy. IDL-1004/ Q.No.318/ Industry-8, dated 24/12/2004. The cabinet sub-committee will be headed by the Chief Minister.
Cabinet Sub-Committee on Determination of Industry Matters: The Special Economic Zones (SEZs) set up by the Joint Venture were troubled by changes in the tax structure of the Central Government, market distortions, etc. The concept of Integrated Industrial Areas (IIAs) was incorporated in the Industrial Policy of 2013 to provide an easy exit route for such activities. The Government is aware that developers have invested heavily in Special Economic Zones in this transitional period and this investment has been stuck for a long time. Therefore, the government is committed to encourage more such initiatives. The" Services" sector has a significant role to play in meeting the target of taking the State's economy to US$ 1 trillion by 2025. In view of these considerations, non-incentive use of service sector will be permitted in the industrial areas which are joint ventures of the State Governments and which are declared as integrated industrial areas after de-notification of Special Economic Zones. Only those services/ projects which have been approved in the government policy of other administrative departments can be taken up in this industrial area. In addition to this, other services/ projects are also covered under Section No. IDL-1004/ PR. 318/ Industry-8, dated 24/12/2004. A decision will be taken by the Cabinet, headed by the Chief Minister.
Page 55 of 80
# Page 56
Maharashtra Industrial Policy 2019
1 Preamble
Maharashtra has been the leader in industrial development in India. With world class infrastructure together with rewarding industrial policies and ease of doing business initiatives, the state is home to several global brands. The State has heralded unprecedented technological advancements in the industries, thus attracting several innovative enterprises and start-ups in various upcoming technology field including Industry 4.0 and IT/ ITes. Maharashtra is an automobile manufacturing hub of the country. The state is also a leader in agro and food processing industries. With the highest exports from the state it has truly become any investors most preferred destination. Major reforms are being implemented in India supporting its steady growth towards becoming the third largest economy of the world. Maharashtra intends to be a major contributor in the Nations economy, by winning its numero uno position and" Magnetic Maharashtra" brand with its progressive vision focused on accelerated industrial growth and sustainable development.
1.1 Introduction to Maharashtra
Maharashtra, the most industrialized state in the country is located in the western region of India. With Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) of INR 24.97 lakh crore (US$387 billion), Maharashtra is the largest economy in India and accounts for 15.01% of the country's GDP in 2017-18. The economy of Maharashtra is mainly driven by manufacturing, finance, international trade, mass media, technology, petroleum, fashion, apparel, gems and jewelry, IT & ITeS and tourism. The city of Mumbai houses the headquarters of most of the major corporate and financial institutions, of the country. India's main stock exchanges (BSE and NSE) and main commodity exchanges are located in the city along with the capital market. Maharashtra has well-established industrial and financial ecosystem and became a leading industrial and financial center of the country under the pragmatic leadership. It has attracted major industrial investments from domestic as well as renowned foreign investors. According to the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Government of India, cumulative FDI inflows in Maharashtra during April 2000 to December 2017 stood at US$ 113.82 billion, amounting to one third of the total FDI inflow in the country.
Magnetic Maharashtra- Attractions Unlimited
Maharashtra is the most favoured destination for industries owing to its well-developed infrastructure, skilled workforce, strategic location with good transportation network, Progressive Sectorial Policies, best incentive policy and much more. Because of this, Maharashtra has been able to attract highest investments from within and outside India and it has emerged as a brand "MAGNETIC MAHARASHTRA- Attractions Unlimited".
1.1.1 Strategically Located: Maharashtra is the third-largest state in India in terms of area and the second-largest in terms of population. It stretches over 307,690 sq.km with a total estimated population of 112.4 million (Census 2011). The Arabian Sea makes up the State's western coast and accounts for a 720 km long coastal line. As per Census 2011, the State is highly urbanized at 45.2%. It is also the wealthiest state in India, by all major economic parameters. The state capital, Mumbai, which is also financial capital of India is one of the largest metropolitan area in the world and India's largest and most populous city. In the age of free movement of goods, post implementation of GST in India, the State is best suited for manufacturing aimed at both national and international markets because of its geographical location as a major business hub connecting North and South India.
Page 56 of 80
# Page 57
1.1.2 Well-developed Infrastructure: The State is well connected to major industrial and consumption centers through road, rail, air and port connectivity. With power generation capacity of over 43,000 MW, Maharashtra ensures 24x7 power supply to its
industries. Through Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC), the state also ensures land (both developed and undeveloped) availability to the investors.
a. Road network: National highways of around 22,000 km are passing through the state. Futuristic expressway projects such as Maharashtra Samruddhi Mahamarg - a super communication expressway and an industrial corridor connecting Nagpur and Mumbai, and Mumbai and Vadodara Expressway - 380 km long, six-lane, controlled-access expressway, connecting the cities of Vadodara, Gujarat and Mumbai, Maharashtra are under construction.
b. Rail network: Two major railway zones are enhancing the State's connectivity to the domestic market. Maharashtra has longest metro rail network of around 233 km under construction in the country with ongoing metro projects such as Mumbai metro, Nagpur metro and Pune metro.
c. Airport and seaports: Maharashtra has 7 domestic airports and 4 international airports and further the state government is developing 10 new airports of which Shirdi, Nashik, Nanded, Kolhapur and Jalgaon airports are currently functional and Ratnagiri, Gondia, Sindhudurg and Amaravati airports are yet to come up. The state is well connected to the world via sea through 2 major ports and 53 minor ports.
1.1.3 Abundant Highly qualified and Skilled Labour Pool: The state is home to 20 state universities, 21 deemed universities and several institutes of national importance like Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT), Indian Institutes of Management (IIM), National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT), National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), National Institute of Construction Management and Research (NICMAR), Institute of Chemical Technology
(ICT) etc. More than 6,000 institutes in the state enrolls over 1.6 million students per annum.
1.1.4 Established Industrial Ecosystem: Several renowned industrial units have come up as a result of the supporting Industrial policy environment. As per Economic Survey of Maharashtra the expected growth of manufacturing sector in 2017-18 is 7.6 per cent.
The state has well developed industrial ecosystem for various industries including Automobile (Pune and Aurangabad region), ESDM (Pune region), Pharmaceuticals & Chemicals (Mumbai- Thane, Aurangabad and Pune region), Engineering (Ahmednagar Nashik, Pune and Aurangabad region, FMCG (Pune region), Textile (Solapur and Nagpur-Amravati region), Food Processing (Solapur, Ahmednagar-Nashik, Nagpur Amravati region), Logistics (Mumbai-Thane and Nagpur-Amravati region), Cement and Steel industry (Vidarbha-Marathwada region) and IT & ITES (Mumbai-Thane, Pune and Nagpur-Amravati region). During 2014 to 2018, 119 private IT parks with an investment of approximately INR 192.60 billion and employment of 5,50,000 have come up in the state.
Page 57 of 80
# Page 58
Ease of Doing Business: Dedicated investor facilitation cell and online Single Window portal has been established under Maharashtra Industry, Trade & Investment Facilitation Cell (MAITRI). The Single Window Portal has provision for single application, payment, tracking and monitoring of majority of industry related approvals across various departments of the State Government. MAITRI cell also acts as a grievance redressal cell. It provides G2B services, one-stop-shop for existing and prospective investors. As per World Bank Doing Business report 2019 (assessment covering 190 economies), India was ranked 77, a massive jump of 23 positions against its rank of 100 in 2018 and 130 in 2017. In the ranking, evaluation of cities of Mumbai and Delhi is done (cities with population over 10 million). Mumbai has been the largest contributor in achieving quantum jump in the World Bank ranking. As per 'Asian Competitiveness Institute of Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy of Singapore' index on ease of doing business in 2016, Maharashtra ranks first in the country.
1.1.5 Conducive Policy Environment and Proven Track Report : Maharashtra has progressive sectional policies for industries aimed at improving business environment in the state. In light of these policies, the state is able to maintain its leadership position in industrial investment. Mega events were organized in the State such as Magnetic Maharashtra and Make in India along with State's participation in various national and international road shows. All these efforts resulted in receipt of industrial investment proposals over INR 8 lakh crore in the last five years.
2 Vision
Maharashtra- a global investment, manufacturing and technology hub, promoting sustainable development.
3 Mission
To make Maharashtra first US$1 trillion economy in the country, by augmenting manufacturing ecosystem, complemented by ease of doing business initiatives, thereby evolving it into a preferred destination for global manufacturers and investors, resulting into largest employment creating state with balanced regional and inclusive growth, by 2025.
4 Target
a. To attain manufacturing sector growth rate of 12% to 13% to reach GSDP share of 25% by 2023-24.
b. Attract investments worth INR 10 lakh crore by 2023-24.
c. Create employment opportunities for 40 lakh people by 2023-24.
5 Policy Objectives and Strategies 5.1 To retain leadership position in industrial investment by providing conducive business environment.
5.1.1 Developing dedicated state-of-the-art infrastructure based on sector specific requirements.
5.1.2 Creating land bank for industries through MIDC.
5.1.3 Providing special fiscal incentive packages to projects of importance including emerging technologies.
Page 58 of 80
# Page 59
5.1.4 Promoting investments through sector specific promotion/policies with focus on identified thrust sectors.
5.1.5 Creating government, industry and academia interface.
5.1.6 Incentivizing investments in R&D and startups.
5.1.7 Facilitating Ease of Doing Business initiatives and strengthening Maharashtra's Single Window System i.e. MAITRI an online portal, to make it a single point for delivery of services.
5.1.8 Setting up of State level councils for promotion of investments and exports.
5.1.9 To promote processing of agricultural produce for enhancing farmer's income.
5.2 To sustain high levels of employment generation, primarily through MSME promotion -
5.2.1 Launching a new flagship scheme - Chief Minister Employment Generation Program (CMEGP) for SMEs thereby creating major employment opportunities 5.2.2 Formulating special fiscal incentives package for MSME and small projects.
5.2.3 Strengthening employment intensive MSME sector through cluster development.
5.2.4 Creating institutional support system for MSME units to improve technology absorption and dissemination, market analysis, training, among others.
5.2.5 Providing additional fiscal support to employment based Mega/Ultra mega projects thereby generating higher employment.
5.2.6 Promoting skilled workforce through closer coordination between industries, technical institutes and skill development department.
5.3 To promote regionally balanced, environmentally sustainable and inclusive industrial growth - 5.3.1 Special fiscal incentives to industrial units in under-developed regions.
5.3.2 Creation of Critical Infrastructure Fund for last mile connectivity.
5.3.3 Support infrastructure creation in private industrial parks.
5.3.4 Financial incentives for infrastructure in industrial areas for MSMEs, women and SC/ST entrepreneurs.
5.3.5 Supporting revival of sick and closed units.
5.3.6 Ensuring environmental sustainability by providing incentives for green industrialization.
6 Policy Period This policy shall be valid for a period of five years from 1st April, 2019.
7 Creating Well-developed Industrial Infrastructure -
Quality infrastructure is a key driver for industrial growth. It is also very important for attracting global manufacturers, investors and other corporates to the State. Although Maharashtra has one of the best industrial infrastructure in place, concerted efforts will be made to develop and strengthen state of the art infrastructure in various industrial estates spread across the State. MIDC will continue to be dedicated agency for developing necessary industrial infrastructure.
7.1 Augmenting Infrastructure and Ensuring Land Availability 7.1.1 MIDC will be primarily responsible for augmentation of existing infrastructure wherever necessary in its existing industrial estates. MIDC would also be responsible for developing state of the art infrastructure in new industrial estates. It would also develop infrastructure in upcoming special industrial ones viz. 20 industrial nodes in Samruddhi Mahamarg, DMIC and various Central/State government industrial corridor projects.
Page 59 of 80
# Page 60
7.1.2 New industrial estates (multi-sector and sector specific) shall be planned and developed, in line with industry requirements. For this, MIDC shall prepare a perspective plan in order to promote systematic and regionally balanced industrial development across the State in the next 5 to 10 years. The study shall cover initiatives to promote green industrialization in these areas.
7.1.3 Considering the upcoming futuristic Industry 4.0 and hi-tech projects such as air taxi, drone, driverless vehicles, etc. necessary industrial infrastructure shall be planned by MIDC.
7.1.4 Although large land bank is available in the State, considering the future industrial land requirement to facilitate INR 10 Lakh crore of investment, MIDC shall create land bank across the State based on demand assessment.
7.1.5 'Excluding Urban Local Bodies Area', MIDC shall be declared the Special Planning Authority (only for permission purposes and no infrastructure support shall be provided by MIDC in such areas) for industrial land above 10 acre for multiple industrial units with single developer for a contiguous land of more than 10 acre and for all the Industrial clusters approved under Government of India and State government schemes.
7.1.6 MIDC shall reserve minimum 500 acre Industrial area for development of warehousing and logistics facilities in the State.
7.1.7 On the lines of MIDC areas, additional floor space index (FSI) shall be permitted in all co-operative industrial estates to the extent of 0.5, over and above the basic FSI. The premium shall be charged at rates as decided by MIDC with approval of the State Government.
7.1.8 MIDC shall promote setting up of flatted galas for the micro and small enterprises under Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) model.
7.1.9 For supporting industrial infrastructure and developing last mile connectivity, Critical Industrial Infrastructure Fund (CIIF) shall be created. Support shall be extended to Co Operative Industrial estates through the CIIF.
7.1.10 The land earmarked for public health amenities in MIDC industrial estates shall be developed by concerned departments. Specially ESIC ( Employees State Insurance Corporation) hospital facilities will be provided by concerned department as per need & demand from Industrial Associations.
7.1.11 For sectors with same additional FSI (IT & ITeS, Biotechnology, Garmenting, Gems and Jewelery and Logistics & Warehousing) under the related policies of the State Government, interchangeability of land use shall be allowed with the approval of State Government.
7.1.12 Land owned by State Government or State Government Organization if required by MIDC for planned development will be made available at no cost.
7.2 Leveraging Special Projects - Department of Industries, Government of Maharashtra, shall promote setting up of industrial clusters along the special projects declared by Central/State Government such as Maharashtra Samruddhi Mahamarg, Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC), Sagarmala, Bharatmala, etc. MIDC will be the nodal agency for development of industrial nodes along the special projects of Central/State Government.
Page 60 of 80
# Page 61
7.2.1 Maharashtra Samruddhi Mahamarg - Maharashtra Samruddhi Mahamarg is a super communication expressway of 700 km length connecting Nagpur and Mumbai, passing through 10 major and 14 other influence districts. Along the expressway 20 industrial areas are being planned which will transform the economy of the rural areas in influence region. MIDC will be the planning authority for industrial layouts in these nodes. The expressway will reduce the travel time drastically. Logistics and warehousing hubs are being planned along the way with Nagpur-Wardha as a major logistics corridor. It would also be developed as Electric Vehicle (EV) expressway by setting up charging stations along its length.
Samruddhi Mahamarg will link the State of Maharashtra to the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor and the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor. Parts of Maharashtra will have direct connectivity to these Corridors and JNPT, the country's largest container port. This, in turn, will enhance the EXIM trade of the State.
7.2.2 Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC) DMIC is Central Government's infrastructure programme aiming to develop new industrial cities as' smart cities' and covering next generation technologies across the infrastructure sector having objective as a' Global Manufacturing and Trading Hub'. Under this two projects are planned in Maharashtra: a) Shendra in Industrial Area (SBIA) Total area of the project is about 84 sq.
km. Proximity to the existing industrial areas of Aurangabad, existing airport and railways, giving strong support for export oriented business.
The node is a port, trade and industrial hub that will augment the part of Mumbai as India's western gateway to global trade, commerce and industry.
7.2.3 Sagarmala and Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs) - Sagarmala project is an ambitious project of Government of India for development of coastal areas and port led development including port-linked industrialization and coastal community development.
Out of the total 14 Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs), 2 CEZS are planned in Maharashtra viz. North Konkan (JNPT linkage port) and South Konkan (Dighi and Jaigad port). The State will support various Coastal Economic Units (CEUs) which are sector specific dedicated industrial areas in CEZS.
7.3 Critical Industrial Infrastructure Fund -
In industrial areas mainly outside MIDC, there are some critical infrastructure issues like last mile road connectivity, dedicated power feeder, water supply etc. which is causing hindrance in the production and evacuation of goods. There has been huge demand for funds from various stakeholders for such kind of basic infrastructural needs which are not addressed by any Department in their budget plan. Considering this requirement and visible impact, Critical Industrial Infrastructure Fund (CIIF) which was created during the previous policy will be continued with an enhanced corpus of INR 1,000 crore over this policy period. This fund will be used to support last mile connectivity, and support creation and up-gradation of industrial infrastructure such as strengthening of power network, effluent treatment plant, roads, etc. This fund will also be utilized to debottleneck infrastructure constraints faced by export oriented units and for infrastructure needs of industrial clusters and various industrial parks. A committee shall be constituted and headed by Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary Industries for sanctioning and administering the fund. State Government through Plan Scheme will provide budgetary support for this scheme over the policy period.
Page 61 of 80
# Page 62
7.4 Promotion of Private Industrial Infrastructure Development - As the land in MIDC industrial estates is scarce, it has resulted in unplanned industrial development in many areas. To streamline this and to promote local entrepreneurship, the State aims to attract private investment in development of private industrial estates, with focus on MSMEs.
7.4.1 To encourage private sector participation in the development of industrial infrastructure, assistance shall be provided to the projects for establishing industrial parks related to thrust sectors identified in this policy.
7.4.2 The industrial estates developed by/for women and SC/ST entrepreneurs & MSMEs will be given preference and higher fiscal support through ongoing schems. If need arises fund will be provided from Special Component Plan (SCP) & Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) 7.4.3 MIDC shall be the planning authority for these private industrial estates
8 Promotion of Thrust Sectors -
With a view to steer industrial development towards high tech emerging sectors and generate employment, the State Government has identified following thrust sectors. Thrust sectors shall be accorded priority in land allotment and incentives.
8.1 Electric Vehicles (Manufacturing, Infrastructure and Servicing) -
With depleting oil resources and rising pollution, Electric Vehicles (EVs) provide an alternative to a sustainable future. Government of India has launched an e-mobility programme such as National Electric Mobility Plan (NEMP) that aims to provide an impetus to the entire e mobility ecosystem which includes electric vehicle manufacturers, charging infrastructure development companies, fleet operators, service providers, etc. With over 25 million vehicles on road and automobile being the major manufacturing industry in the State, Maharashtra Government aims to maximize the adoption and manufacturing of EVs in the State. Hence, the State Government has categorized Electric Vehicles manufacturing, infrastructure and servicing as a thrust sector. The State Government has also launched EV & Related Infrastructure Policy 2018, to promote the sector.
8.2 Aerospace and Defence Manufacturing - India is world's largest importer of arms (contributed 12% to the global imports during 2013-17, as per SIPRI report, March 2018), and offers a readymade market for aerospace and defence manufacturers. India's defence expenditure has grown by 231% in last one decade and is expected to reach INR 7.74 lakh crore (US$120 billion), in the next ten years. Considering the historical base of the several ordnance factories in Maharashtra, the State is well placed to take advantage of aerospace and defence investments in India and give impetus to Make in India initiative of the Central government. Accordingly, the State Government has included the industry segment as one of the thrust sectors. The State also has an Aerospace & Defence Manufacturing Policy 2018.
8.3 Industry 4.0 (Artificial Intelligence, 3D Printing, Internet of Things and Robotics, Nanotechnology, among others) - With rapid development in the field of information technology and hardware, the world is fast witnessing the fourth industrial revolution. The combination of industry, Internet of Things (loT), IOT based Kiosks, Embedded Technology. 3D Printing, Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, Nanotechnology and other such new technologies, has given rise to Industry 4.0. Developed countries like Germany, Japan, South Korea and United States etc. have already started implementing their plans based on Industry 4.0. In order to keep domestic industry globally competitive, the State Government shall promote investment towards emerging industry 4.0 technologies.
Page 62 of 80
# Page 63
8.4 Promotion of Integrated Data Centre Parks (IDCP) As per the stipulation of Government of India to store the data within the country, there is huge demand for data storage. Considering the location of Mumbai City, its power infrastructure and under-sea cables landing at Mumbai, it has the potential of becoming largest data storage hub in the World. Integrated Data Centre Parks wherein, a developer company builds infrastructure required for Tier - 4 data centres and various other companies can use this data storage space will be promoted & incentivised. Integrated Data Centre Parks developed by private developers and investment made by companies utilizing the data storage space therein will be eligible for fiscal incentives under Package Scheme of Incentives by way of refund of SGST etc., for maximum of 10 years. (excluding investment in land and building) In the policy period, only first 5 such Integrated Data Centre Parks of Tier-4 category with minimum investment of Rs.1500 Crores by the developer company, will be eligible for above benefits.
The IT/ITES Policy- 2015 of the State would stand modified to this effect.
8.5 Textile Machinery Manufacturing - Maharashtra has been a leader in textiles by virtue of cotton production. Textile manufacturing machineries are largely imported. The State will promote textile machinery manufacturing as thrust sector and will offer suitable incentives.
8.6 Biotechnology and Medical and Diagnostic Devices - In order to leverage the state's advantage in hi-tech manufacturing, Maharashtra aims to be a leader in biotechnology and Medical & Diagnostics Devices manufacturing. Key initiatives that shall be extended to this sector include: a. MIDC to setup a dedicated Biotechnology Parks at suitable locations in the state (Nashik, Pune, Aurangabad and Nagpur, among others).
b. Biotechnology Parks shall have dedicated infrastructure including Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP, including collection and treatment), and Testing & Certification Labs.
c. Manufacturing Park for Medical and Diagnostics Devices will be setup.
8.7 Agro & Food Processing (Secondary and Tertiary Food Processing units) Agro & food processing sector has a huge potential for employment generation across the entire State, especially in MSMEs. The secondary and tertiary processing units has immense growth potential and value addition. Therefore, the State Government shall endeavor to set up mini food parks (MFPs) in all districts of the state. MFPs shall be set up on minimum 10 acres of land. For developing mini food park land pooling from adjoining farmers will be admissible.
These parks shall have dedicated infrastructure required for specific commodity based units.
Special incentives will be given for this thrust sector.
8.8 Information Technology (IT) & IT Enabled Services (ITeS) - Home to over 1,200 software units and 30% share of the country's software exports, Maharashtra provides a well-established ecosystem for IT & ITeS companies. Pune and Mumbai are the major IT & ITeS centres in the State. To place Maharashtra amongst one of the most preferred investment destination in IT sector, the State has declared it as a thrust sector also has a separate incentive policy.
8.9 Electronic Systems Design & Manufacturing (ESDM) and Semiconductor Fabrication (FAB) Domestic demand for electronics hardware products is increasing every year in the country and most of it, is met through imports. This thrust sector thus has tremendous potential for growth and also huge employment opportunities. Maharashtra with established ecosystem for electronics hardware manufacturing is poised to take advantage of Government of India's
Page 63 of 80
# Page 64
efforts towards domesticating electronics hardware manufacturing. Recognizing its importance to the State, a special' Maharashtra Electronics Policy-2016' has been announced.
8.10 Logistics & Warehousing - Logistics and warehousing industry in India is growing at a CAGR of 10% and has the potential to be worth INR 13.21 lakh crore (US$205 billion) by 2020. Maharashtra's strategic location and seamless connectivity with national and international geographies on account of its port and airport linkages, makes it an ideal location for logistics and warehousing activities.
Logistics and warehousing hubs are being planned along the way with Nagpur-Wardha as a major logistics corridor. The State Government has announced a special policy named Logistics Parks Policy 2018.
8.11 Green Energy/ Bio Fuel Production -
Maharashtra has over 25 million vehicles on road and this figure is all set to increase in near future. With rising concerns regarding the carbon emissions and increasing oil imports, there is urgent need to support Green Energy/ Bio Fuel Production. Switching to renewable energy sources like bio fuels (including ethanol), biomass from all crops etc. will not only make the State clean but decrease State's reliance on oil imports. Further this might increase crop realization for the State's farmers. To this end state, will permit cultivation of non-edible oilseeds suitable for bio-fuel production in tribal & degraded forest areas and allow its harvesting etc.
Hence, Green energy/ Biofuels Production is defined as a Thrust Sector. The State shall provide additional incentives for the sector.
8.12 Sports and Gym Equipment Manufacturing - With improving economic climate, rising disposable incomes and changed perception towards fitness is fueling the demand for sports and gym related goods and services in India. It has opened up new business opportunities for manufacturing of sports and gym equipment's.
The labour intensive industry provides employment to more than 500,000 people in India. The state shall promote investments in the sports and gym equipment manufacturing.
8.13 Nuclear Power plant equipment manufacturing - India aims to manufacture nuclear power plant equipment and fuel assemblies locally under its Make in India program. This would also provide equipment's for the second phase of Kudankulam Nuclear Power Plant. Maharashtra shall provide support for manufacturing highly niche segment of nuclear power machinery.
8.14 Mineral / Forest based Industries :
In order to promote employment generation in the state & also to encourage the value addition / use of forest produce in Industries, particularly in forest rich & mineral rich areas, forest based industries, mineral based industries & agro-industries / plantations will be promoted. This will be applicable only to those minerals which are under the purview of the state government.
Since these Industries will be located in tribal areas, funds from Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) will be utilised for creating infrastructure. Additionally even if the entrepreneur / Industries are non tribal the eligibility conditions for availing incentives will be provision of 90% employment to tribal persons during the incentive period. The percentage of employment after availing incentives period for tribal persons will be 60%.
8.15 The up coming Industries from niche segment / sunrise sector in the future which will contribute to the industrialization of the state will be accorded the status of thrust sector. The Committee constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary (Industries), will decide about inclusion of those sectors.
Page 64 of 80
# Page 65
9 Promotion of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and Small Industries :
MSMEs are the backbone of State's economy. With more than 3 million MSMEs, Maharashtra has largest number of MSME in the country, which contributes more than 80 per cent of the total employment. MSMEs are best placed to utilize local resources and create local entrepreneurship and employment. About 40% of the exports originate from MSMEs.
Considering the vital role of this sector, the State Government intends to strengthen and promote the MSME sector for achieving inclusive industrial growth and promoting employment generation. The investment limit for incentive purpose for small industrial units will be increased upto INR 50 crore in Fixed Capital Investment (FCI) so that more such units can come under the ambit of small industries. In order to enhance the benefits of this policy to MSME units, the state will dovetail various MSME schemes into one scheme.
Following interventions are proposed for MSME promotion:
9.1 District-wise identification of potential MSMEs - The State shall conduct a study of all districts of Maharashtra aimed at identifying potential for MSME manufacturing activities, and formulating and executing strategies based on Geographical Indications (GI).
A Geographical Indications (GI) is primarily an agricultural, natural or a manufactured product. (handicrafts & industrial goods) originating from a definite geographical territory. eg.
Nagpur Oranges, Warali Paintings, Vengurla Cashews, Solapur Chaddar etc. GIs are not only part of our rich culture& collective intellectual heritage, but they also supplement the incomes of our rural farmers, weavers, artisans& craftsmen across the country. The promotion of GI's is in line with the Government of India's" Make in India" campaign& therefore it is our responsibility to preserve& protect them.
Maharashtra Small Scale Industrial Development Corporation (MSSIDC) shall be entrusted with this task.
9.2 Launch of new flagship scheme- Chief Minister Employment Generation Programme (CMEGP)-
9.2.1 Government of Maharashtra will launch a new employment-generation programme (Chief Minister Employment Generation Program / CMEGP) targeting unemployed youth. The scheme is aimed at motivating local youth towards self employment by extending easy and accessible bank finance. The scheme shall cover manufacturing as well as service sector units. The Industries Department of
Government of Maharashtra shall be the nodal agency for implementing the scheme.
Under the scheme eligible persons aged between 18 and 45 years will be trained and promoted for self-employment for which equity to be converted into back end subsidy, which will be provided by State Government against bank loans. The project cost will be up to a maximum of INR 50 lakh under manufacturing sector and INR 10 lakh under business/ service sector. State Government will provide budgetary support through scheme expenditure & if necessary in proportion of beneficiaries from Special Component Plan (SCP) & Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) & Women & Child Development Department.
Page 65 of 80
# Page 66
The scheme shall be implemented through Directorate of Industries and Khadi & Village Industries Board (KVIB). The salient features of the programme are:
a. Promotion of self-employment - Minimum 1,00,000 micro enterprises during the policy period.
Creation of employment opportunities- Minimum Rs 10 lakh during the policy period.
Entrepreneurship Development Programme for youth- 2,00,000 youth during the policy period.
Financial support by way of grant in aid- 15% to 35% of the approved project cost.
e. The scheme covers manufacturing and business/ service sector.
f. Boost to rural and semi urban economy.
9.3 Institutional Support to MSMEs
MSME units need support for adoption and dissemination of technology, exploring markets, management techniques, etc. For this, the State Government shall assist in strengthening the existing related institutions within Maharashtra.
a. State will endeavor to support Centers of Excellence (CoE)/ research facilities to develop/ assimilate technologies that are of significance to the industry.
b. CoE/ research facility shall have Plug & Play Incubation Facilities and provision for mentoring and training.
c. State will also support institutional tie-ups for sector specific skill development and for use of new/ upgraded technology or products.
d. Workshops shall be conducted in the institutes for SME entrepreneurs to create awareness and for adoption of new technologies.
e. State will promote tie-up with global MSMEs.
9.4 Cluster Promotion -
Maharashtra is the leading state in the country for Industrial Cluster development. Cluster based approach is increasingly being recognized as sustainable, cost-effective and an inclusive strategy to ensure competitive and improved MSME units.
a. The State Government shall offer fiscal assistance for approved Common Facility Centers (CFCs) across the state except A and B zones.
b. The limit for fiscal assistance for cluster promotion will be increased to INR 10 core from existing INR 5 crore.
c. The State Government shall offer fiscal assistance to the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVS) specifically setup for the purpose. A state level Steering Committee shall evaluate and approve proposals under the scheme.
d. In new MIDC industrial estates, 20% area shall be reserved for MSMEs. Out of this,
20% area shall be reserved for SC/ST entrepreneurs and 5% for women entrepreneurs and industrial units of Women's Savings Groups. For rehabilitation of Ex-Servicemen & to promote self-employment among Ex-Servicemen 2% plots will be reserved for Ex-servicemen.
e. Common Facility Centre (CFC) established under the cluster development programme of Central/ State Government will be treated as industrial activity.
9.5 Facilitating Public Funding for MSMEs - There are many MSMEs which have potential to expand on a larger scale. However, due to fund limitations they are unable to scale up. In view of their capacity augmentation, SME exchanges were setup in the country in 2012. The exchange has been instrumental in garnering public funds in the State. The CAGR of SMEs was around 40% in last fiscal year.
Page 66 of 80
# Page 67
MSME units can now access public funding through listing on stock exchanges. The State Government intends to support MSME units by providing financial assistance to first 250 SMEs based in Maharashtra which will be listed on the SME exchange, Mumbai during the policy period.
9.6 Advisory Cell on Insolvency and Bankruptcy Resolution for MSMEs - To provide speedy resolution of insolvency and bankruptcy, the Government of Maharashtra shall maintain region-wise cells to guide the concerned units seeking resolution under the Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code 2016 mechanism. For this, MSSIDC will be strengthened and empowered suitably.
9.7 Fiscal Incentives to MSMEs -
Maharashtra state offers most attractive fiscal incentive in the country.
9.7.1 For the purpose of this policy, MSME shall include units as per the definition of Government of India- Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006, as well as the small industries with FCI of upto INR 50 crore.
9.7.2 A basket of incentives, their aggregate amount not exceeding a specified ceiling will be offered to eligible MSME units:
Table 1 - Eligibility Criteria to MSME -
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Maximum Admissible                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                         |               | Ceiling |        |   | Eligibility |
| Taluka / Area Classification                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                         | Fixed Capital | as % of | Period |
| Investment (INR crore)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | FCI                                                                                                                                     | (Years)       |
| A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | For the purpose of this policy, MSME shall include units as per the MSMED Act, 2006, as well as the units with FCI of upto INR 50 crore |
| B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 30%                                                                                                                                     | 7             |
| C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 40%                                                                                                                                     | 7             |
| D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 50%                                                                                                                                     | 10            |
| D+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 60%                                                                                                                                     | 10            |
| Vidarbha, Marathwada, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg & Dhule                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 80%                                                                                                                                     | 10            |
| No Industry Districts, Naxalism Affected Areas* and Aspirational Districts**                                                                                                                                                                                      | 100%                                                                                                                                    | 10            |
| *Naxalism affected areas as per Government Resolution No.: PSI -2013/ (CR-54 ) /IND 8 Dated 1st April 2013 issued by Government of Maharashtra Industries, Energy and Labour Department. * Aspirational Districts are Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9.7.3 Eligible MSME units in Agro & Food Processing (secondary and tertiary processing units and Farmer Producer Companies for manufacturing/processing activity only), Green energy/ bio-fuel and Industry 4.0 shall be given additional support.
9.7.4 The power tariff subsidy, for eligible new units located (other than A areas) in Vidarbha, Marathwada, North Maharashtra, and Districts of Raigad, Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg in Konkan will be to the extent of INR 1/- per unit consumed and in other areas (except A areas), to the tune of INR 0.5/- per unit consumed for 3 years from the date of commencement of commercial production.
9.7.5 In areas other than A area, Interest subsidy @ 5 per cent p.a., maximum upto the value of electricity consumed and bills paid for that year, will be admissible.
Page 67 of 80
# Page 68
9.7.6 In addition to incentives listed above, eligible MSMEs will be entitled to 100 per cent stamp duty exemption within investment period for acquiring land (including assignment
of lease rights and sale certificate) and for term loan purposes. However, in A and B areas Stamp Duty exemption will be offered only to IT and BT manufacturing units in IT
and BT Parks. Eligible Units under PSI 2013 Scheme will also be eligible for stamp duty exemption for their Investment Period.
9.7.7 Eligible New MSMEs in C, D,D+, No industries Districts and Naxalism Affected Area will
be entitled to exemption from payment of electricity duty for tenure equal to the eligibility
period. However, in A and B areas Electricity Duty exemption will be offered to 100 per cent Export Oriented MSMEs and IT/BT units for seven years.
9.7.8 All the central government and State government schemes relevant to MSMEs shall be dovetailed in this policy.
9.7.9 Marketing Assistance scheme shall be formed for MSMEs to support marketing activities. To improve the competitiveness of MSMEs in marketing, both at the national
and international level, fiscal assistance shall be provided for SC/ST/women entrepreneurs and for participation in national and international fairs.
9.7.10 For strengthening of MSMEs, standalone incentives (not linked with PSI) shall be
admissible to the MSMEs so as to promote quality competitiveness, Zero Defect Zero
Effect (ZED scheme), Research & Development, technology up-gradation, water & energy conservation, cleaner production measures and credit rating.
9.7.11 Eligible Micro, Small & Medium enterprises & Small Industries as defined above shall
be offered Investment Promotion Subsidy (IPS) on Gross SGST paid by the unit on the
first sale of eligible products billed and delivered to the same entity within Maharashtra.
10 Attracting Large, Mega and Ultra-Mega Investments -
Maharashtra has the largest number of Large and Mega projects in the country. These
Large, Mega and Ultra-Mega projects have a proven track record of providing multi-faceted benefits to the State in terms of revenue and employment generation. To leverage the benefits
further, concerted efforts are made in the policy to ensure regionally balanced and inclusive
growth of the industry.
Page 68 of 80
# Page 69
10.1 Large Scale Industries -
10.1.1 Large scale industries (LSI) are defined as industrial units satisfying the minimum threshold limits of Fixed Capital Investment or Direct Employment prescribed in the following table. LSIs shall be offered incentives that are graded in a way so as to assist dispersal of investment to industrially under-developed areas. A basket of incentives, their aggregate amount not exceeding the specified ceiling will be offered to eligible LSI units.
Table 2 - Eligibility Criteria to LSI
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Minimum Admissible                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |            |               | Minimum Direct     |
| Taluka / Area Classification                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |            | Fixed Capital | Employment (number |
| Investment (INR crore)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | of people) |
| A & B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 750        | 1000          |
| C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 500        | 750           |
| D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 250        | 500           |
| D+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 150        | 400           |
| Vidarbha, Marathwada, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg & Dhule                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 100        | 300           |
| No Industry Districts, Naxalism Affected Areas* and Aspirational Districts**                                                                                                                                                                                   | 100        | 250           |
| *Naxalism affected areas as per Government Resolution No.: PSI -2013 / (CR 54)/IND-8 Dated 1st April 2013 issued by Government of Maharashtra Industries, Energy and Labour Department. * Aspirational Districts - Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOTE: For MSME units the ceiling of fixed capital investment is Rs. 50 Crores. For units having investment more than Rs. 50 Crores & upto the minimum investment stipulated for large scale units in table 2 above, the industrial promotion subsidy shall be 40% of the SGST paid for the first sale of goods sold in Maharashtra and billed & delivered to the same entity. This incentive will not be applicable for units located in "A" & "B" zone.
a. LSI units in thrust sectors shall get additional incentives.
b. Eligible LSI units shall be offered Investment Promotion Subsidy (IPS) on Gross SGST paid by the unit on the first sale of eligible products billed and delivered to the same entity within Maharashtra. The incentives will be given to the LSI units on first cum-first serve basis.
c. In addition to incentives listed above, eligible large units will be entitled to 100 per cent stamp duty exemption within investment period for acquiring land (including assignment of lease rights and sale certificate) and for term loan purposes. However, in A and B areas, Stamp Duty exemption will be offered only to IT and BT units in IT and BT Parks. Eligible Units under PSI 2013 Scheme will also be eligible for stamp duty exemption for their Investment Period.
d. Eligible new units in C, D, D+, No Industries Districts and Naxalism affected Area will also be entitled to exemption from payment of electricity duty for a tenure equal to the eligibility period. However in A and B areas, Electricity Duty exemption will be offered to 100 per cent EOU Large Scale units and IT/BT units for 7 years.
e. The units applying for incentives in the first year of policy period will be given full basket of eligible incentives for respective category and location of the unit. If the unit applies in subsequent years of the policy period, the basket of incentives will be
Page 69 of 80
# Page 70
reduced by 5% for each year of delay in application. This provision will not be applicable to industries in thrust sectors.
f. Eligible LSI units in Agro & Food Processing (secondary and tertiary processing units
and Farmer Producer Companies for manufacturing/ processing activity only), Green
energy/ biofuel and Industry 4.0 shall be given additional support.
g. Aggregate fiscal incentives provided by various departments or agencies of the State Government shall not exceed the IPS cap (as percentage of FCI) defined by the State Government.
h. Incentives to the LSI shall be given to promote quality competitiveness, Research & Development, technology up-gradation, water & energy conservation, cleaner production measures and credit rating.
10.2 Mega and Ultra Mega Projects -
10.2.1 Industrial units satisfying the minimum threshold limits of Fixed Capital Investment or Direct Employment prescribed in the following table shall be classified as Mega Projects/ Ultra Mega Projects:
Table 3 - Eligibility Criteria, related to Incentives Disbursement for Mega and Ultra-mega Units
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Type of Unit                                                                           |       | Taluka/ Area Classification                         |       | Minimum Admissible Fixed Capital Investment (INR crore) |   | Minimum Direct Employment (number of people) |
|                                                                                        |
|                                                                                        |
|                                                                                        |
| A&B                                                                                    | 1,500 | 2,000                                               |
| 1,000                                                                                  | 1,500 |
| D                                                                                      | 750   | 1000                                                |
| D+                                                                                     | 500   | 750                                                 |
| Mega Industrial                                                                        |       | Vidarbha, Marathwada, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg & Dhule | 350   | 500                                                     |
| Units                                                                                  |
|                                                                                        |
| No Industry Districts, Naxalism Affected Areas and Aspirational Districts              | 200   | 350                                                 |
| Ultra-Mega                                                                             |       | Entire State                                        | 4,000 | 4,000                                                   |
| Industrial Units                                                                       |
| *Naxalism affected areas as per Government Resolution No.: PSI -2013/ (CR- 54)/IND-8   |
| Dated 1st April 2013 issued by Government of Maharashtra Industries, Energy and Labour |
| Department.                                                                            |
| Aspirational Districts - Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar                   |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Provided that :
a. Ultra-Mega/ Mega projects based on employment criteria shall be required to maintain the qualifying direct employment on rolls of the company throughout the
year. If the employment criteria is not maintained for any period of the year, then Industrial Promotion Subsidy shall not be admissible for such year/s.
b. Minimum Direct Employment prescribed in the table above should be created within
a period of three years from the date of commercial production.
c. The investment in Captive Power Plant shall not be considered for determining the
qualifying criteria for eligibility as Mega Project/Ultra Mega Project.
Page 70 of 80
# Page 71
d. 100% Captive Process Vendor (CPV) investment can be considered as a part of admissible FCI. However, CPV investment will not be counted for determining qualifying criteria as Mega/ Ultra Mega Projects.
e. The present policy of MIDC regarding allotting plots on priority basis to mega and ultra-mega projects shall be continued.
10.2.2 High Power Committee (HPC), under Chief Secretary, constituted vide GR.IDL 1005/(CR119)/IND-8 dated 2.6.2005 will approve the customized Package of Incentives to Mega and Ultra Mega projects on case-to-case basis. Cabinet Sub Committee under Chairmanship of the Chief Minister constituted for Industry vide GR IDL 1097/(13478)/IND-8 dated 18.1.1998 and reconstituted vide GR.IDL 1004/(CR318)/IND-8 dated 24.12.2004 will approve customized incentives on case-to case basis.
10.2.3 State government shall be an equity partner of 9% through Maharashtra Vikrikar Rokhe
Pradhikaran Limited (MVRPL) in Large, Mega and Ultra Mega projects in the State and
projects with FCI of more than INR 500 crore. The equity will be in lieu of incentives received by these projects under Industrial Policy 2019-2024. The equity participation shall be in the form of shares only. The shares and dividend shall be issued in the name of MVRP. In order to avoid hostile takeover, if State government decides to sell its equity, the first right of refusal will be with the promoter of the company at prevailing market rates only.
10.2.4 For mega and ultra-mega projects availing incentives from the State government under Package Scheme of Incentives will have to provide employment to local persons as stipulated by the State Government. Failing to do so will result into reduction of offered incentives.
10.2.5 Government may consider providing customized package of incentives on case-to-case basis as deemed necessary for projects of special importance (may or may not be mega/ultra-mega projects). The High Power Committee (HPC) under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary shall recommend the customized package of incentives for any such project to the Cabinet sub-committee for approval.
Apart from Industries Departments Package Scheme of Incentives Micro, Small, Medium, Large, Mega and Ultra-Mega Units are given incentives/ concessions by other administrative departments of State Government (e.g. Spinning Mills). The financial refunds / incentives to an industrial units from all sources put together shall be admissible within the limit of 100% of Fixed Capital Investment.
11 Green Industrialization Assistance -
Maharashtra is a frontrunner state in sustainable development initiatives and promotes green industrialization, so as to minimize adverse environmental impact.
a. Eligible units shall be provided a Green Industrialization Assistance for undertaking measures to conserve water, energy and environment. Projects covered under the scheme include waste management systems (including ETP, STP etc.), pollution control systems/ devices, health and safety systems/ devices, water conservation/ harvesting systems/ devices and captive renewable power generation. Budgetary support from States Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB) & Government of Indias schemes will be considered. A committee under chairmanship of Development Commissioner (Industries) will approve this incentives.
Page 71 of 80
# Page 72
b. Solar captive power plant will be considered as a part of admissible FCI for the purpose of incentives. A captive solar power plant will be defined as one wherein at least 80% of power generated is utilized by the unit annually.
12 Promoting Research and Development (R&D) -
R&D is crucial in enhancing the productivity and economic growth of a region. A robust R&D infrastructure directly contributes to sustained growth and creates employment opportunity for scientific community.
India has high potential for intellectual property. To avoid brain drain and utilize existing talents it is necessary to provide special impetus to industrial research. It also necessary to protect intellectual property rights of a researcher. Following initiatives will be undertaken to promote R&D: a. R&D units including stand-alone facilities of eligible industrial units shall be considered as part of FCI for the purpose of availing fiscal incentives.
b. Provision of special fund shall be made to support industrial R&D activities.
C. Promotion of industry and academia linkage through universities, centre of excellence, technical institutes, etc. Contributions from respective departments like Higher & Technical Education, Universities etc. will be considered.
d. Companies/ units/ private individuals shall be eligible for fiscal assistance towards obtaining patents related to manufacturing activities.
e. Considering the nature of various new technologies involved, fiscal assistance shall also be given to R&D units carrying out joint ventures.
13 Promoting Ecosystem for Startups -
As a policy, it has been the endeavour of State Government to promote innovative start ups by providing necessary infrastructure, and creating facilitating environment involving young entrepreneurs to enable sharing of their ideas and help them by handholding, mentoring and providing them financial assistance.
Steps would be taken to promote startups right from the college level and coordination between Government, industry and academia. Startups in thrust sectors & emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, robotics, internet of things, nanotechnology etc. will be provided with mentors from industry/business houses. The State will setup and promote incubators to handhold Startups in general and also for SC/ST category and women entrepreneurs. Collaborations with world class incubators/universities in setting up of incubators, will be encouraged through need based fiscal and administrative interventions.
14 Revival and Unlocking Assets Tied Up in Closed Units - Considering the immense flow of investment intentions in the State (due to initiatives like Make in India and Magnetic Maharashtra) in the last few years and the policy target of Rs. 10 Lakh Crore investment in the next five years, the State requires land to realize investments.
Land in Maharashtra is a scarce resource especially in developed regions. To address this issue, the State Government will incentivize industries to invest in under-developed areas.
Further, the State intends to unlock land locked up in closed/unviable units.
Accumulated Government dues and penalties thereon, dues of financial institutions, labour dues and issues, and reluctance of companies to dispose-off their lands are the major hindrances in unlocking industrial lands tied up with unviable/ closed units. The State Government intend to address these issues through the following policy measures:
14.1 Amnesty scheme
a. The State Government shall bring an amnesty scheme for government dues and penalties under which unviable and closed units shall be allowed to settle all the State Government dues (including those of agencies of the State Government) by
Page 72 of 80
# Page 73
paying entire principal amount in one installment and complete waiver of interest and/or penalty thereon. The amnesty scheme shall be operationalised for a limited period. Further, an online portal shall be operationalised wherein all State Government dues of units shall be displayed.
b. The settlement of dues of financial institutions (including those of Maharashtra State Finance Corporation), are subject to RBI guidelines. However, the State Government shall coordinate with financial institutions towards early resolution of such dues.
c. Maharashtra State Finance Corporation (MSFC) shall announce an attractive One Time Settlement (OTS) Scheme.
14.2 Unlocking assets tied up in closed units - a. To achieve this objective, units that are closed for a continuous period of more than 5 years and have a minimum of 20,000 sq. m. contiguous land in MIDC areas shall be allowed to develop such land for setting up industrial cluster.
b. Special initiatives shall be taken up to promote the development of such industrial land. Also Land use pattern in the ratio of 60:40 ie. 60% Industrial & 40% Support Services will be permitted in MIDC area.
c. In order to under take the development activities in such lands non-fiscal concessions will be offered to developer to make their model Sustainable A four members Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) will decide the modalities for Floor Space Index (FSI) to be offered, premium to be levied and other issues. The other members of the committee will be Secretary (UD-1), Secretary (Finance/Expenditure), Development Commissioner (Industries), Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC).
d. To promote early implementation of redevelopment projects, FSI incentives shall be extended for a limited period of time. The redevelopment projects must be fully completed within a period of 7 years.
15 Walk to work concept - a. In order to promote walk to work concept and decongest the cities, satellite offices shall be developed in the State. The companies will be encouraged to develop accommodation facilities for employees within 5 km radius of the work area.
b. MIDC shall be the planning authority for such areas and other government agencies will participate for development. In order to under take the development activities in such lands non-fiscal concessions will be offered to developer to make their model Sustainable A four members Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary (Industries) will decide the modalities for Floor Space Index (FSI) to be offered, premium to be levied and other issues. The other members of the committee will be Secretary (UD-1), Secretary (Finance/Expenditure), Development Commissioner (Industries), Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC).
C. In the residential area, commercial activities would be allowed such as cinema theatres, public auditorium and multiplexes, hospitals, nursing homes, schools and colleges, training institutes and hostels related to them. Only non-polluting industry will be allowed such as service sector.
d. If the developer does not comply with this requirement then an additional congestion tax may be levied.
16 Facilitating Ease of Doing Business in the State - Ease of Doing Business is an indicator of clear, speedy and hassle-free regulations for businesses. In order to create a facilitating business environment below mentioned interventions are targeted:
Page 73 of 80
# Page 74
16.1 Strengthening Maharashtra Industry, Trade & Investment Facilitation Cell
(MAITRI) -
MAITRI is an initiative of State Government to facilitate Ease of Doing Business. Since its inception it has been very effective in facilitating clearances/permissions/Licenses to numerous enterprises. MAITRI has made paradigm shift in role of government from being regulator to that of a facilitator. MAITRI will be awarded autonomous status for effective implementation of initiatives taken by Government for promotion of industries, trade & commerce considering the new opportunities in business, trade & commerce. Role of MAITRI will also be extended towards attracting global investments. As an autonomous body MAITRI will represent Maharashtra on national and global platform. MAITRI will work jointly with National & International Industries Associations/Forums by organizing and participating in various Summits, Fairs, Exhibitions, Road shows etc. It would be a platform for promotion of brand Magnetic Maharashtra.
a. All State related services, consents and permissions required to set up and operate an industry in Maharashtra shall be provided through MAITRI. All information on State's resources, industrial infrastructure, procedure for setting up units, grievance redressal, and rules / regulations / orders etc. will be available on MAITRI portal.
b. To ensure delivery of services and accord approvals within specified timelines, MAITRI shall be empowered through legislative enactments. MAITRI will be made more autonomous for functioning to ensure timely approvals and services to investors. Initial corpus shall be contributed by related department / boards/ corporations / authorities eg. MIDC, MPCB, MHADA,CIDCO etc.
c. MAITRI will coordinate with Industrial Associations for Ease of Doing Business initiatives.
d. To be more effective, MAITRI facilitation and handholding setup shall be operationalized at Regional Levels & cost will be borne by concerned department for complaints related to which will be received at MAITRI level.
e. Development Commissioner Industries will identify issues & authorities for such legislative enactment.
f. The Special Assistance Cell will be set up in MAITRI for the promotion/guidance of the Schedule castes, scheduled Tribes & Women Entrepreneurs. Required administrative expenses for this cell will be done jointly by the Social Justice Department & Tribal Development Department.
16.2 Regulatory Simplification - a. Procedural simplification in obtaining environmental clearance will be carried out.
b. Procedures for building plan approvals for industries shall be rationalized across the State.
c. Excluding Urban Local Body Area for industrial are as exceeding 10 acres, MIDC shall be declared the Special Planning Authority.
d. Only in MIDC industrial areas, MIDC shall act as the interface for local authority taxation purposes.
e. MAITRI will be empowered with appellate powers under Right to Services Act. For effective functioning, powers will be delegated by separate enactments to MAITRI Cell.
Page 74 of 80
# Page 75
17 Initiatives for Promotion of Trade and Commerce -
17.1 Administrative wing to support Trade and Commerce -
Considering the importance of trade and commerce in creation of employment and
contribution to State's economy, a separate wing/desk shall be created under the Industries
Department for promotion of Trade and Commerce and a separate section will be created in the
Directorate of Industries for implementation support. Additional posts of independent Desks at
Industries Department & Directorate will be created for Trade & Commerce.
17.2 Establishment of Global Investment Promotion Council -
To attract global industrial investment, State Government has made several initiatives for
investment promotion and facilitation. The State has already established single window investor
facilitation cell - MAITRI to facilitate clearances through single window on behalf of several
Government agencies to industrial entrepreneurs.
To tap the potential of interests shown by global investors, the State government shall set
up Global Investment Promotion Council (GIPC) of Maharashtra. The council shall create strong
network of enterprising people across the globe to attract investment in multiple sectors in the State. Further, the Council shall establish bilateral ties with countries across United States,
Europe, Asia, Middle East and Africa etc. The council will be headed by the Chief Minister.
The Global Investment Promotion Council will undertake various activities to attract global
investment in the State:
1. Identify and select opportunities for engagement in target sectors globally.
2. Establish bilateral ties with industrially prosperous countries to boost global investment in the State.
3. Organize and participate in domestic and international promotional events to focus on getting the global investment in the State.
4. Arrange G2G and G2B meetings for Global investors.
5. Participate in trade fairs and organize roadshows outside India.
6. Global lead monitoring, follow up and hand-holding support for global investor's.
7. Facilitate development of brand Magnetic Maharashtra as investment destination by way of promotional advertisements.
8. Track foreign investment in the country through office of Consulate General and coordination with different government agencies.
9. Set up a web-based portal for online tracking of investor interest.
10. The office of the Global Investment Promotion council will be based in MAITRI.
18 Export Promotion Initiatives -
Maharashtra is ranked first in India with a total export of Rs. 4.49 lac crores in financial year
2017-18 and has been on an upwards trajectory over the last decade. Major exports from
Maharashtra include gems & jewelry, machinery and equipment, pharmaceutical products, IT,
iron and steel, vehicles and parts/accessories, cotton and other agro-produce. A study was
undertaken to identify the export strategy and prominent sectors were identified for further
boosting its exports in the area of apparel and textiles, engineering goods, agro-produce and
processed foods, IT/ITES, auto and auto components and pharmaceuticals and chemicals.
Page 75 of 80
# Page 76
18.1 Setting up of Export Promotion Council - Any country's economic performance is measured by its share in global trade i.e. export.
On the line of Government of India's initiatives in setting up sectoral Export Promotion Councils, Government of Maharashtra envisions to set-up Maharashtra Export Promotion Council. The Council shall promote export oriented business in the State, act as a platform to that would assist in creating awareness, and making units more competitive. The council will be headed by Minister (Industries). The key activities of the council will include following: 1. Interaction with global and domestic stakeholders, government agencies and international communities.
2. Preparation of roadmap for export promotion.
3. Address grievances of export units and provide relevant export information.
4. Export Data Intelligence: It will act as a think tank for market intelligence, business intelligence etc. related to demand of products, brands and services across the globe.
5. It will act as a facilitation body for various initiatives regarding marketing assistance to boost the export from the State.
a) Brand Development: Facilitate development of brand for export products by way of promotional advertisements of popular brands from the State at both domestic and global level.
b) Export Awareness: Export potential and procedure awareness will be disseminated through training programs, workshops, seminars etc.
c) Organize Exhibitions: Provide assistance to exporters / institutions / associations / EPCs for organizing export promotion exhibitions, seminars, conferences etc. (domestic and international).
d) Participate in Exhibitions: To encourage the participation in domestic and international exhibitions the State will provide assistance in the form of participation cost.
e) Export Product Development: To encourage export support to new products and new markets, samples to foreign buyers will be promoted for MSMEs.
f) Export Excellence Awards: Awards will be given to exporters for excellence in sector specific export performance.
18.2 Export Infrastructure Support - 1. Exhibition-cum-Convention Centers: Exhibition-cum-Convention Center will be set up in different regions of the State to support regional export potential.
2. Last mile connectivity: Last mile connectivity in the form of physical infrastructure needed will be taken on priority basis, especially for agro related exports.
3. Testing and Quality Certification Laboratories: State will identify and assist in setting up Testing and Quality Certification Laboratories near relevant clusters. Dedicated Testing and Quality Certification Laboratories will be set up at export clusters of Nagpur, Nashik, Pune, Jalgaon, Aurangabad, Solapur, Kolhapur, Sangli and Ratnagiri. Wherever feasible land will be provided by MIDC. Assistance of up to 50% of capital cost of project cost (excluding land) with a cap of INR 5 crores will be given in the form of grant in aid for first 12 laboratories in the State over the policy period.
4. State Government through Plan Scheme will provide budgetary support.
Page 76 of 80
# Page 77
18.3 Venture Capital Fund - The State will provide fund to SIDBI for venture capital to assist in viability-gap-funding for the Export Oriented Units (EOUS).
19 Special Initiatives -
Various special initiatives are proposed to boost investment and employment in the State while keeping in view regionally balanced and inclusive growth.
19.1 Special Incentives for Industries in the underdeveloped districts of Maharashtra -
The policy envisions to bridge the gap of regional disparity in industrial development by giving additional incentives to 1. Vidarbha, Marathwada, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg and Dhule,
2. No Industry Districts,
3. Naxalism Affected Areas (as per Government Resolution No.: PSI -2013/ (CR-54)/IND 8 Dated 1st April 2013 issued by Government of Maharashtra Industries, Energy and Labour Department).
4. Aspirational Districts (Osmanabad, Gadchiroli, Washim and Nandurbar).
Additional fiscal incentives and period for availing these incentives, will be offered under PSI 2019 to MSMEs, Large and Mega projects in these districts to attract investments and generate employment.
For employment based large and mega projects, threshold limit for creation of employment will be less than other areas.
19.2 Special Incentives for Industries in Agro & Food Processing, Green energy/ bio-fuel and Industry 4.0 - Eligible Industrial units in Agro & Food Processing (secondary and tertiary processing units and Farmer Producer Companies for manufacturing/processing activity only), Green energy/ biofuel and Industry 4.0 shall be granted 20% additional fiscal assistance and two year additional eligibility period shall be applicable.
19.3 Special Incentives for SC/ST and Women Entrepreneurs -
The industrial estates developed by/for women and SC/ST entrepreneurs will be given priority and higher fiscal support.
In new MIDC industrial estates, 20% area shall be allotted to MSMEs on first priority basis. On first priority basis 20% area shall be allotted to SC/ST & Nav Budha entrepreneurs and 5% to women entrepreneurs and industrial units of Women's Savings Groups & 5% to persons with Disabilities. The maximum ceiling for allocation on priority basis will be 25%.
Accordingly modifications will be made in the Land allocation Rules of MIDC.
Higher fiscal support will be given to entrepreneurs setting up incubators for SC/ST and women.
Fiscal support will be given for SC/ST and women entrepreneurs for participation in international trade fairs.
Fiscal support will be given for SC/ST & women entrepreneurs for participation in international trade fairs. To encourage Scheduled Caste/ Tribes entrepreneurs and for establishment of their industries easily Venture Capital facility has been made available under Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Special Package Scheme of incentives for SC/ST entrepreneurs.
The benefits of the Venture Capital facility will be given to the existing industries as well as newly established industries.
Page 77 of 80
# Page 78
20 State Level Udyog Awards -
Maharashtra is the most industrialized state of India and it contributes 15% of country's GDP. Various industries have immensely contributed to industrial development of the State thereby generating massive employment. In order to recognize their yeoman contribution, the State proposes to felicitate such industries/ business houses every year, by conferring them with State level Udyog awards. New scheme for these awards will be formulated.
Presently, Udyog Diwas celebrations were organised in various districts of the State. The District Award Scheme will be suitably re-casted to encourage the MSMEs.
21 Strengthening of District Industry Centres -
District Industry Centres (DICs) will be strengthened to provide comprehensive information on various policies and schemes as well as to support MSMEs in marketing, trade and commerce, entrepreneurship development and revival of sick MSME units at district level.
The DICs will be strengthened by improving infrastructure, promoting digitization and undertaking capacity building measures. The existing schemes under DICs will be suitably amended as per the requirement.
22 Apex Institute for Promotion of Entrepreneurship -
22.1 Apex Institute for Promotion of Entrepreneurship -
State of the Art, Apex Entrepreneurship Development Institute of Maharashtra shall be established on the land of Maharashtra State Small Industrial Development Corporation (MSSIDC) at Kalamboli, dist Raigad by the Government near Mumbai. The main features are as follows:
1. The institute will be State's Apex institute to promote entrepreneurship and will conduct exclusive entrepreneurship and management programmes, sector specific skilling programmes, hands-on training, mentoring to promote new generation entrepreneurs and start-ups.
2. The institute will have residential facility for atleast 200 participants.
3. The institute will enter into national as well as international collaborations and will be equipped with the state of the art facilities like Data Centre, E-Library, Incubation centre, exhibition and display centres etc.
4. It will be represented by the organisations namely MSSIDC, MIDC, KVIB & the State Departments like Technical & Higher Education Department, Social Justice & Tribal department etc.
5. The existing set up of Maharashtra Centre for Entrepreneurship Development (MCED) will be utilised for the institute.
6. The Institute will be autonomous body under supervision of ACS/PS (Industries) and the Executive Council will be under the chairmanship of Development Commissioner (Industries).
22.2 Setting up of State of the Art Exhibition-cum-Convention Centre -
Exhibition-cum-convention centres are being developed by State/Local Authorities such as MIDC and Municipal Corporations. MIDC shall develop state of the art Exhibition cum Convention Center at the appropriate location in the State. The State Government will provide the required support for the development of state of the art Exhibition-cum-convention centre.
Page 78 of 80
# Page 79
23 Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Activities in the State -
As part of the goodwill gesture to the society, the industrial units which avail incentives from the State Government under PSI shall spend minimum 50% of their Corporate Social Responsibility Fund in the State.
24 Sector Specific Policies -
a. During recent years, Maharashtra has launched/ amended sector-specific policies, which shall be dovetailed with New Industrial Policy.
b. Notwithstanding any of the above, State Government has made special provisions in various sector specific policies for the State. These policies are:
i. Policy for Industrial Parks comprising of flatted galas for Readymade Garment
manufacturing, Gems & Jewelery, Micro Electronics and Engineering units 2018.
ii. Fin tech Policy 2018.
iii. Maharashtra COIR Policy-2018.
iv. Electrical Vehicle and Related Infrastructure Policy 2018.
V. Logistics Parks Policy 2018.
vi. Textile Policy 2018.
vii. Cloud Computing Policy 2018.
viii. Aerospace & Defence Manufacturing Policy 2018.
ix. IT/ITES Policy 2015.
X. Electronics Policy 2016.
xi. Retail Trade Policy 2016.
xii. Incentive for Development of Integrated Industrial Area 2018.
xiii. Bharat Ratna Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar Special Package of Scheme Incentive for SC/ST Entrepreneurs 2016.
xiv. Women Entrepreneur Policy XV. Telecom Infrastructure Policy -2018
c. The prevailing sector-specific policies bear reference to old industrial policies of Maharashtra and their General Rules/ Package Scheme of Incentives (PSI). Post notification of this policy (Industrial Policy of Maharashtra 2019), such references
shall be interpreted as bearing reference to Industrial Policy of Maharashtra 2019 and its General Rules/ Package Scheme of Incentives (PSI), respectively, unless specified otherwise.
d. The Stamp duty exemption for eligible units under various policies (like IIA Policy, Electronics etc) will continued.
25 Monitoring and Review of the Policy -
In order to ensure effective review and implementation of Industrial Policy of Maharashtra 2019 (providing necessary clarifications/interpretation of the policy; monitor implementation progress), a committee headed by Principal Secretary (Industries), Government of Maharashtra, shall continue to function, as per the Industrial Policy of Maharashtra 2013.
Additionally, a Policy Monitoring (PMU) shall be set up to implement and monitor the progress
of implementation, of new industrial policy. The PMU shall also assist the Monitoring and Review committee headed by Principal Secretary (Industries), Government of Maharashtra, on related issues.
Page 79 of 80
# Page 80
26. Committee for Changes in Policy ;
If any doubt / problem / disparity arises in Maharashtra Industrial Policy 2019, then the powers to take decision in respect of such doubt / problem / disparity and make necessary changes in the industrial policy will be with the Cabinet Sub-Committee under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Chief Minister constituted vide G.R. No. IDL-1004/C.R. 318/ Ind-8, dated 24/11/2004..
27. Cabinet Sub-Committee on deciding Industry related matters: -
Due to changes in tax structure of the Central Government and the unfavourable market conditions the special economic zones (SEZs) established in the joint venture stuck in problems.
The concept of Integrated Industrial Areas (IIA) was incorporated in the Maharashtra industrial
policy - 2013 to make an easy exit route for such areas. The Government is aware that the
investor has invested largely in such special economic zone which are in transitional phase and these investment were locked for a long time. Therefore, the government has decided to give more encouragement / incentives for such conversions. The share of 'Service' sector is significant in achieving the target of taking the state's economy upto 'One Trillion U.S. dollars' by the year 2025. Considering this fact 'Services' sector use 'without incentives' will be permissible in the Integrated Industrial Area which have been declared after the Special Economic Zones in joint ventures of the State Government are de-notified. Only the services/projects which are approved under policies of other administrative departments of state can be taken up in these Industrial areas. In respect of other services/projects, decision will be taken by the Cabinet Sub-Committee under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Chief Minister constituted vide G.R. No. IDL-1004/C.R. 318/ Ind-8, dated 24/11/2004.
Page 80 of 80