# Page 1
Non-conventional energy policy 2020
Part-I- Consolidated Policy for Transmission Linked Projects of the State for generation of power from new and renewable (non-conventional) sources- 2020 and Part-II- Consolidated Policy for Non-Transmission Linked Projects of the State for generation of power from new and renewable (non-conventional) sources- 2020.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Industry, Energy and Labour,
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Hutatma Rajguru Chowk, Madame Cama Road, Mantralaya, Mumbai 400 032.
Date: December 31, 2020.
Reference: 1) Government Resolution, Department of Industry, Energy and Labour, No. Apau-2015/ No. 49/ Energy-7, dated 20/07/2015 2) Government Resolution, Department of Industry, Energy and Labour, No. APAW-2015/ PR No.367/ URJAV-7, dated 11/02/2016 3) Proposal of Maharashtra Power Development Agency, Pune No: MAHAWARGA/ COMMUNICATION/ GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION/ 2020-21/ 1947, dated 28/07/2020.
Introduction: Due to increasing industrialization and urbanization in the state, the demand for traditional electricity is increasing day by day. Currently, electricity is produced mainly from coal, natural gas and petroleum.
These energy resources are limited and will be depleted in the future. The overuse of such energy sources contributes to air pollution. As a result, global warming and climate change are affecting everyone. According to the Paris Agreement, 40 percent of the world's energy needs will come from renewable sources by 2030.
The Government of India has set a target of generating 175 GW of electricity from various non-conventional energy sources by 2022. Out of this, 100 GW will be solar, 60 GW will be wind and the remaining 15 GW will be non-conventional energy sources. The participation of all the states will be important to achieve these targets in a time bound manner. Considering the potential of generating power from the available energy sources in the State, efforts need to be made to commission 25000 MW of non-conventional energy projects by 2025.
Since 1995, the Government has been formulating a policy on non-conventional energy generation to increase the amount of electricity generated from alternative sources as compared to conventional power generation.
Under this policy. As on 31st March 2020, 9305 MW of non-conventional energy projects have been commissioned and a total of 2123 MW of projects are in progress for commissioning. In view of this, there is a lot of scope in the non-conventional energy sector in the state.
Maharashtra. The State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SECR) has made renewable energy purchase obligation (solar and non-solar) applicable to power distribution companies in the state. This has made it mandatory for all power distribution companies to purchase a certain amount of non-conventional energy as compared to the total power consumption in their licensed areas. As a result of the sun
# Page 2
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
There is a need to plan for achieving the target of setting up 25,000 MW of non-conventional energy projects by 2025. Therefore, it is necessary to rethink the existing non-conventional energy policy and formulate a new policy that encourages the participation of the government and the private sector.
It is primarily aimed at creating a conducive environment for private/ government investment in transmission linked, non-transmission and storage projects.
Considering the above, the Government was contemplating to announce Transmission Linked/ Non-Transmission Combined Non-Conventional Energy Generation Policy-2020 for the power generation projects from new and renewable energy sources in the State.
Government's decision:
The Government is approving the implementation of Transmission Linked/ Non-Transmission Combined Non-Conventional Energy Generation Policy-2020 for power generation projects from new and renewable energy sources in the State as follows:
Objective:
Considering the growing demand for electricity in the state, it is targeted to set up 17,360 MW of new non-conventional energy generation plants in the next five years.
2) To facilitate the growth of employment opportunities and investment through a policy that supports investment in the state by developers while setting up such projects.
(iii) A State Government policy in line with the objectives of the Central Government's Non-Conventional Energy Policy.
(iv) the various Acts of the State Government and in particular the Electricity Act, 2003 and the rules, regulations, etc. Construction of projects subject to the provisions of rules, regulations, codes, etc., prescribed by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission and amendments thereto from time to time.
Period of implementation of the policy and transition period of the previous policy:
1) Since the policy was announced. It will be effective from March 31, 2025.
2) The policy. The Consolidated Policy on Transmission Linked Projects for Generation of Electricity from New and Renewable Energy Sources, 2015 dated 20th July, 2015 and the Non-Transmission Policy on Generation of Electricity from New and Renewable Energy Sources, 2016 dated 11th February, 2016 are being revised.
However, the non-conventional energy projects which have been granted registration during the policy period of 2015 and 2016, or in the subsequent three months after the announcement of the policy, will be eligible for registration under the respective policy of 2015 and 2016. relating to these projects.
Page 2 of 22.
# Page 3
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
The benefits of the incentives mentioned in the policy will be admissible if the project is commissioned within one year of the announcement of the new policy.
The permissions:
Registered companies, local/ urban local bodies, government agencies, partnership firms, private individuals, semi-government organisations, cooperative societies, farmers groups are permitted to set up projects under this policy. Following this, Ma. The project work will be awarded after the selection of the permissible company/ institution in the case where the project is being funded/ funded by the State Government and after evaluating their financial and technical capabilities. The selection criteria will be decided by the Maharashtra State Electricity Board. The committee will have the principal secretary, energy department, chairman and managing director of DGMET and MSEDCL as members and the director general and general energy as member secretaries.
General guidelines:
The general guidelines under this policy will remain as follows until the target limit is met:
Non-conventional energy projects will be developed by following the guidelines of the Ministry of Power, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and various agencies under it.
2) Maha Urja is being appointed as the steering agency for the implementation of this policy. All non-conventional energy projects will have to be registered with the Ministry of Power. All transmission projects will be implemented by MSEDCL and non-transmission projects will be implemented by MSEDCL.
Priority will be given to the development of hybrid projects by combining wind and/ or solar power with other conventional/ non-conventional energy sources and incorporating storage capacity as per requirement. Such projects will be aligned to those objectives in proportion to their resources.
4) To demonstrate the financial viability of hybrid projects with storage capacity, hybrid pilot projects will be set up with the assistance of the State Government/ Central Government or with the approval of the Government.
5) It will be mandatory to complete the project within the stipulated time frame, otherwise the concessions in this policy will not be allowed. If the project is not completed within the stipulated time due to exceptional or emergency circumstances, the Committee constituted by the Department of Power under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary (Power) shall have the power to grant extension of up to two years for such projects, if the application is made before the expiry of the prescribed time. But this has been extended. It will be no later than March 31, 2026.
The Electricity Act, 2003, regarding the project and disposal system. The Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission shall be subject to the regulations, orders, definitions, orders of the Government, regulations, rules, acts and provisions made by the State Government from time to time.
Page 22 of 3.
# Page 4
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
(7) The clarifications given by the Department of Energy, after considering the feedback received from the Government after thorough scrutiny of the policy matters and if any clarifications are required in the course of implementation, shall be final and binding on all concerned.
The procedures required for setting up, operation and effective implementation of the projects under this policy shall be separately issued by the Department of Energy thereafter.
9) The mid-term review of this policy will be undertaken by the state government as per requirement. Also, appropriate changes in the policy will be made after taking into account the difficulties in its implementation, changes in the policy or technology of the central government and approval at the competent level.
10) This Policy shall be implemented by the Government of Maharashtra in letter and spirit; however, failure to implement any part of this Policy shall not be treated as a" change in law" for the purposes of legal agreements between the parties.
11) Non-conventional energy projects will be required to obtain consent letter from Maharashtra Pollution Control Board as per the prevailing policy as per requirement.
The following facilities are being provided to make the implementation of the policy easier and investment friendly:
A single window web system similar to the Maitri Scheme of the Department of Industries will be developed by MAHYURJA for the permissions, approvals, consents, etc. related to various administrative departments of the State Government for non-conventional energy projects. To the extent of the prescribed objectives, the Register will be issued automatically and immediately by the General Authority after the project holder uploads the documents on this web portal by completing the required prescribed exhaustive documents and depositing the prescribed fee, subject to taking full responsibility of the authenticity and legality of the documents through a self-declaration.
(ii) Short-term submergence of land in reservoirs, Pazar lakes and minor irrigation tanks in Maharashtra will be used for setting up of non-conventional energy projects.
3) Under this policy, the project holder will get Rs. Project holders who want to invest in projects worth Rs 1500 crore or more will be provided with" Support Officer" by the General Authority. Such support officer will assist the project holders in getting the projects sanctioned without any delay. It will also coordinate with the concerned agencies regarding the problems faced by the government agencies in the construction of the project.
The progress of the projects sanctioned under this policy will be reviewed by the General Authority every month to remove the difficulties in the implementation of this policy. Further, it will submit its report to the Department of Energy by 10th of next month along with the next time-bound action plan for each project for completion of the project within the stipulated time.
The meeting of all the registered project holders will be held by MAHAYURJA at least once in three months or more often as required to resolve the issues and assist in the implementation of the project.
Page 22 of 4.
# Page 5
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Wherever necessary, the Government will take feedback from the project holders and send recommendations for their utilization and compliance with the policy.
6) The Department of Power will constitute a Steering Committee with representatives of the concerned departments under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Power to resolve the issues of the project holders. The project owners of non-conventional energy sources with a capacity of more than 25 MW will approach the Steering Committee as and when required to resolve their issues.
7) The existing policy and procedures will be suitably modified to ensure that the grid connectivity required and available for the project is readily available as per the demand based on the progress of the project.
Grid connectivity without any prejudice will be treated as a" right" till the goal is achieved.
The MSEDCL, MSEDCL and State Transmission Undertakings (STUs) will make efforts to provide grid connectivity from the nearest point of the grid distribution network, considering the technical feasibility. The infrastructure required for this will be created by the project developer or the concerned agency under the prevailing policies, rules and regulations.
Policy on availability of land:
The following policy will be adopted regarding the availability of government land for non-conventional energy projects: In general, there will be three types of government land: Type 1:- Land owned by various institutions of the state government, companies, corporations, public undertakings, administrative departments, urban and local bodies, universities, etc. (excluding land owned and occupied by the revenue department) and land owned by the revenue department but leased out.
Type 2: The land owned and occupied by the revenue department.
Section 3- Land owned or occupied by private or central government, central institutions/ corporations/ public undertakings, ordnance factories, defence forces, etc.
Type 1: (a) MSEDCL/ GENERAL will enter into an agreement with the concerned land owning agencies for setting up of non-conventional energy projects on the first type of land. such an agreement.
The parties may, at any time, provide the premises on lease, lease agreement or on a revenue sharing basis, as may be agreed upon by both parties. The Government may make available, with prior permission, at the competent level, the lands which have been provided on non-transferable and non-transferable terms of use. Other conditions, for example. The lease period, lease rate, etc. will continue to be applicable. Apart from the sub-letting of leased land, the land can also be made available by creating a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). For utilization of such lands for non-conventional energy projects, permission will first be taken at the competent level by the land-granting authority for conversion of the said lands. For local bodies, the land required for the project is up to 15 acres, at the gram panchayat level, 15-25 acres.
Page 22 of 5.
# Page 6
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
The area can be provided to the Panchayat Samiti and if it is more than 25 acres, it can be provided at the district council level.
The laws will be amended accordingly. However, in respect of Government lands which have been transferred/ leased out to Local Bodies for specific purposes.
Prior permission of the government is required for this. In the case of urban local bodies, the concerned civic bodies shall enter into a final agreement by deciding on the availability of such land on terms and conditions. To lay down the terms and conditions of the administrative department or institution concerned for the place occupied by the administrative department and others and the place
Will be able to pay rent. After that, if they want to set up a non-conventional energy generation plant on the land owned by such entities and others, they will be able to set up under the provisions of this policy.
(b) Provide space for transmission of electricity generated from non-conventional energy sources to the concerned institutions, departments, etc. at the earliest at the rate of fixed cost on priority.
Section 2: (a) In respect of land under the Revenue Department, MSEDCL, MSEDCL and MSEDCL shall requisition the land required for their non-conventional energy projects from the District Collector of the concerned district.
In pursuance of this demand, the concerned District Collectors shall, on priority, allot such land, excluding the space reserved for solid waste management and other restricted spaces, on lease/ lease agreement on suitable terms and conditions, as per the prevailing policy of the Government, at a nominal cost of Rs. 1 will be able to make available at this rate options that both parties will agree on a 30-year lease agreement. However, this space can be accessed free of charge. However, after the commissioning of such non-conventional energy generation projects, the government will have to pay 5% of the profit generated from the project (assuming the land cost is normally 5% of the project cost). (For this, the District Collectors and Divisional Commissioners will be empowered to transfer such land to the concerned up to a certain limit.) For this purpose, the District Collector and Divisional Commissioner will transfer such land to the concerned in their jurisdiction. They will also take approval at the competent level where necessary.
(b) Where MSEDCL, MANIERMIT and MAHAWARJA are going to set up their non-conventional energy projects either on their own or through a developer (PPP basis), such required land, if not intact, shall be requisitioned by the District Collector of the concerned district for government land therein for consolidation. In accordance with this demand, the concerned district collectors will be able to make such land available for the implementation of non-conventional energy projects in their jurisdiction on priority. as well as where necessary
will be accepted at the level. A surcharge or lease can be levied at the rate of 30% of the value of such land.
(Assuming that the cost of land is generally 30% of the developed land) c) The concerned Collector will be able to make available such land within his jurisdiction for transmission of non-conventional energy generation at a rate which is arrived at as per the quick reckoner on priority.
Page 22 of 6.
# Page 7
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Section 3: (a) In respect of land belonging to the Central Government and other lands, the land may be made available for non-conventional projects as per the land policy of the State Government on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by both the parties. If the Central Government PSUs approach MSEDCL along with the developer for setting up solar power projects on their land, they can set up such solar power projects with mutual understanding. If such a developer (SPPD) comes to the MSEDCL regarding the solar park approved by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy of the Central Government, they can set up such solar power projects with mutual understanding.
(b) In addition to this, the DGM, MSEDCL and MSEDCL may, at their own cost and with mutual consent, acquire land from private landowners on lease, purchase or by mutual agreement. For such projects, DGM, MSEDCL and MSEDCL may take action through SPV/ independent company as per requirement for availability of land.
Re-energizing existing Renewable Energy Projects:
All existing non-conventional energy projects will be encouraged to increase their generation capacity. This can be achieved by either installing new equipment in the same source in such projects or by increasing the efficiency or by hybridizing with other non-conventional sources.
2) These policies will include the increase in production capacity till the target is achieved. In case of hybrid projects, the policy will be applicable to those projects as per their respective sources.
3) If the existing non-conventional power plant has a power purchase agreement with the distribution companies and is proposed to increase the generation capacity, the existing power purchase agreement will continue for the source, capacity and remaining tenure.
4) The creation of excess in the project will be considered as non-traditional project.
5) Such surplus power generated may be sold to the distribution company through prescribed procedures.
6) In case of hybrid sources it will be necessary to install separate meters for separate sources. If separate metering of the enhanced capacity is not possible in case of increase in the capacity of the plant from the existing source, the capacity shall be calculated (including the use of capacity utilization factor for solar and wind sources) as per the existing power purchase agreement first to quantify how much additional power will be transmitted in addition to the existing power purchase agreement and the remaining capacity shall be deemed to be outside/ in addition to the power purchase agreement. This will continue for the remaining period of the power purchase agreement.
After the existing power purchase agreement of the project is over, the entire project will be treated as a single project and the power generated therein can be sold to the distribution company through the prescribed process.
8) Limitations of various sources will be considered as per the then existing policy.
Page 22 of 7.
# Page 8
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Part-1
Transmission Linked Projects from New and Renewable Energy Sources
(1) Solar Power Generation Projects: The schemes/ targets for solar power generation covered under this policy are as follows:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A. No.                                    | The name of the scheme                                                                                                                                                                                  | Objective (Capacity)    | Sources of funding                                   |
| 1.                                        | (a) Development of solar power projects.                                                                                                                                                                | 10000                   | The private developer,                               |
| (b) Grid-connected rooftop solar projects | 2000.                                                                                                                                                                                                   | the central government, |
| 2.                                        | (a) Implementing other urban, water grid, rural water supply schemes of the State on solar energy in addition to the Government's AMRUT Abhiyaan and Maharashtra Suvarnajayanti Nagarotthan Mahabhiyan. | 500 30                  | Private developers, central government, institutions |
| 3.                                        | To develop transmission linked solar power generation projects by providing private investment by setting up farmers cooperatives/ companies/ groups.                                                   | 250                     | private companies, institutions,                     |
| 4.                                        | Development of energy storage systems for solar/ wind based power generation projects.                                                                                                                  | 50                      | Private development companies, organizations         |
| 5.                                        | E-vehicle charging stations based on solar energy.                                                                                                                                                      | 50                      | Private development companies, organizations         |
| 6.                                        | Installation of solar/ wind solar-hybrid transmission connected power plants at the site of the Mahavirja.                                                                                              | 50                      | Private development companies, organizations         |
| Total                                     | 12,930                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) Development of solar power projects.
(1) (a). Considering the increasing use of solar energy in the state, the available solar base space and the obligation to purchase renewable energy, a total of 10,000 MW of solar power generation projects are being targeted for implementation under this policy. It will cover various types of solar projects and associated hybrid projects with other conventional or non-conventional energy sources.
(1) (a). Under this policy, the minimum capacity of solar power generation plant will be 1 MW.
Page 22 of 8.
# Page 9
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
(1) (a). Under the policy, solar power generation projects can be developed by the state electricity distribution/ generation companies through competitive bidding process to meet their renewable energy purchase obligations or for sale of power to third parties for open access/ captive use within the state or outside the state.
(1) (a). 4 Solar power projects to be set up in the State with State Transmission Undertakings (STUs) and Inter-State Transmission Undertakings (CTU/ ISTS) will be mandatorily registered with the General Power Authority.
(1) (a). 5 The action on Central Government projects will be taken as per the provisions of the guidelines prescribed by the Central Government.
(1) (a). 6 The survey of low pressure, high pressure and high pressure substations and transmission distribution channels required for the project will be carried out jointly by the developers and distribution companies/ Mahanagar Transmission. The sub-stations will be developed by the developers at their own cost as per the technical parameters of the Distribution Companies/ MTAs and as per the budget agreed by them and under the supervision of the Distribution Companies/ MTAs. This will include the substations in the evacuation system and any strengthening or changes that may be required in the transmission and distribution channels. The transmission connection projects will be mandatorily made available within the stipulated time frame till the targets are met under the policy.
The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for this will be laid down by the Department of Energy.
(1) (a). 7 The duration of power purchase agreement for solar power generation projects under the said policy is Rs. It will be governed by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission. The project is financially viable
The duration of the contract is at least 10 years. The final decision will be taken by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission. While developing such projects (Open Access/ Captive/ Group Captive/ Third Party), the producer/ consumer will be required to pay taxes/ duties etc. to the government. They will also have to mandatorily maintain the rates of duty and taxes applicable to their area-wise distribution companies.
(1) (a). 8 solar power generation projects will have the facility to register if they are deemed permissible as an industry component, if required.
(1) (a). 9 Under this policy, if the solar power plant is to be installed in the area/ district where the minerals are found, it will be necessary to submit a no-objection certificate from the Department of Geology and Mining.
(1) (a). Under this policy, solar power projects can be developed through the solar park system even without a central government scheme. The minimum capacity of such a project will be 5 MW. Projects of less than 5 MW but with a minimum capacity of 1 MW can be developed in solar parks. If such small projects are physically contiguous and if their capacity is 5 MW, they will also be given transmission connection by the power distribution companies/ Mahatrans. Such projects will be entitled to receive transmission connection up to the prescribed target.
Page 22 of 9.
# Page 10
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
(1) (a). 11 Under this policy, the implementing agencies for the Chief Minister Solar Agriculture Channel Scheme will set up solar power plants in accordance with the targets set by them.
(1) (a). Under this policy, cooperative and private sugar mills, cotton mills, MIDC and other industries in the state will be able to install solar power plants on their remaining land, motorable roads and rooftops without violating the existing rules, laws and regulations.
(1) (b) Grid-connected rooftop solar projects:
(1) (b). Under this policy, projects under the Central Government's Rooftop Transmission Linked Solar Scheme (GCRT) and rooftop transmission link solar projects to be set up at a cost of Rs.1000 crore will be developed.
(1) (b). 2 Grid connectivity shall be treated as a" right" without any prejudice. The MSEDCL will try to provide grid connectivity from the nearest point of the grid distribution network by looking at the technical feasibility.
(2) (a) To operate the urban and rural water supply schemes in the State on solar energy:
(2) (a). Under this policy, a total capacity of 500 MW is being targeted in the next 5 years.
(2) (a). 2 The land required for such projects will belong to the concerned department/ institution.
(2) (a). 3 Bench mark cost per MW of the project will be determined from time to time.
(2) (a). 4 The concerned departments will be allowed to enter into an agreement with M/ s EESL, similar organization or developer company to implement the scheme on ESCO basis for urban and rural water supply schemes.
(2) (a). 5 In order to implement this scheme, the concerned administrative departments will decide to implement the scheme.
(2) (a). 6 The modalities in this regard will be decided by the Department of Energy in detail thereafter.
(2) (b) Use of transmission linked solar pumps for supply of minor water and tap water supply:
Under this scheme, transmission linked solar pumps will be used for public water supply schemes for supply and supply of potable water in villages/ wadis/ hamlets/ gram panchayats where rural and remote areas do not have access to electricity. For this, a scheme will be implemented for minor water and tap water supply by installing solar-based pumps of 3, 5 and 7.5 horsepower capacity on the available sources like ponds/ wells/ coupons.
(2) (b). Under this scheme, a target is being set to install 8,000 transmission connected solar pumps of 3, 5 and 7.5 horsepower per year in villages/ hamlets/ hamlets/ gram panchayats in the state as per the requirement.
(2) (b). For this, villages/ wards/ hamlets/ gram panchayats with a population of up to 5000 as per technical eligibility will be eligible.
Page 22 of 10.
# Page 11
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
(2) (b). Under this, the installation of the transmission connected solar pump will be required to be done as per the specified technical specifications and ratings given by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy from time to time.
(2) (b). 4 In order to implement this scheme, the concerned administrative departments will decide to implement the scheme.
(2) (b). 5 The procedure and criteria for implementation in this regard shall be decided by the Department of Energy in consultation with the General Power.
(3) Development of Transmission Linked Solar Power Generation Projects of Farmers Co-operative Societies/ Companies/ Groups (PACS/ SHGs/ Farmers Producers Organization):
Under this policy, a total of 250 MW capacity is being targeted in the next 5 years.
(3) The land required for the project will be owned by the farmers' company/ PACS/ SHG/ Farmers Producers Organization.
(3) The cost per megawatt for the project will be determined by the General Power.
(3) Under this, various farmer cooperatives/ companies can participate in the scheme by raising the required equity, mortgaging the land of the project or through private investment. Such power will be purchased by the MSEDCL.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| (3).5 Solar energy under solar power project when the project holder installs such project on agricultural land/ water body.                  |
| The height of the structure for installation of the module is 4 m from the ground with the responsibility of safety as per the requirement or |
| The height of the dam and ground should be at least 1.5 m above the danger level.                                                             |
| (3).6 Also, the project holder shall be required to construct the solar module structure of such project at a height of 4 m from the ground.  |
| Use of the space under the structure of the project, if necessary, if responsible for safety                                                  |
| It will be allowed to do so for reasons that include preparing hides for stray animals, poultry farming and                                   |
| This will include goat/ sheep rearing, storage, cold storage, etc.                                                                            |
| The available plan can be availed as an additional grant.                                                                                     |
| (3) 7 In order to implement the said scheme, the concerned administrative departments shall take a decision to implement the scheme.          |
| (3) 8 The modalities of implementation in this regard shall be decided by the Department of Energy thereafter.                                |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(iv) Development of Energy Storage Projects on Solar/ Wind based pilot basis:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Under the Policy, a total capacity of 50 MW has been targeted over the next five years, out of which 20 MW is to be set up. |
| The remaining 30 MW capacity will be privatized within a period of 5 years.                                                 |
| The projects will be developed by the developer.                                                                            |
| The feasibility will be examined.                                                                                           |
| (4) The approval of the MSEDCL regarding the power and the possible power tariff in such projects shall be obtained.        |
| (4) Power from such projects shall be purchased from the MSEDCL through a power sale agreement.                             |
|                                                                                                                             |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 22 of 11.
# Page 12
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| (4) The distribution companies shall store the peak load of electricity as per the above sale agreement.                                                    |
| The power distribution company will take the electricity from the system and pay the electricity bill to the Maha Energy/ private developer.                |
| Payment of electricity as per the rates fixed by the Maharashtra State Electricity Regulatory Commission or as per its policy.                              |
| Will pay.                                                                                                                                                   |
| (4) In order to implement the said scheme, the concerned administrative departments shall take a decision to implement the scheme.                          |
| (4) The ceiling limit and the procedure of implementation of the project to be constructed under section 6 shall be determined by the Department of Energy. |
| It will be decided later.                                                                                                                                   |
| Setting up of solar-powered e-vehicle charging stations:                                                                                                    |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under this policy, a target of 50 MW of e-vehicle charging stations is being set up in the next 5 years.
(2) The land required for such project shall belong to the project installer/ investor.
(3) The installers of the scheme may participate in the scheme by raising the requisite equity or by way of private investment.
(4) The administrative departments concerned shall take a decision to implement the scheme.
(5) The detailed procedure in this regard will be explained by the Department of Energy.
(6) Installation of solar/ wind solar-hybrid transmission connected power plants at the site of the Mahavirja:
Under this policy, a total of 50 MW capacity projects are being targeted to be commissioned by Mahajot in the next 5 years. The land required for the project will be of great energy. The Maha Energy will determine the procedure for this and submit a proposal to the MSEDCL and the government and take appropriate approval.
(6) The entire power generated from these plants will be discharged into the power system of MSEDCL at market discovered rate.
(2) The policy of generating electricity from wind energy:
Under the policy, wind power projects can be set up on land as well as on 720 km of the western coast.
Under this policy, a target has been set to set up new wind power plants with a total capacity of 2500 MW.
2) Under this, the project holders can register the project by self-declaration to the General Power until the completion of the target. While doing so, the project can be started by stating that all the applicable provisions of the state government have been complied with.
3) To meet the renewable energy purchase obligation in the state, wind power projects can be developed for private consumption, open access and export of electricity to other states.
4) Non-agriculture status will be applicable to the lands of the projects. For this purpose, suitable changes in the existing Acts/ Rules/ Regulations/ Codes etc. will be made by the Revenue and Forest Department.
Page 22 of 12.
# Page 13
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
5) Projects will have the facility to register as" Industry Component" if permissible.
The wind power projects to be set up under this policy will have to obtain a consent/ no objection certificate from the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board.
7) If there is government fallow land/ forest land available at the project site and if the demand is made to the concerned Collector/ Forest Department, the Collector/ Forest Department will determine the permissibility and other rule-bound ancillary matters in the planning and lease/ lease/ lease using a transparent method. If the project is not completed within the stipulated time, the approval will be automatically cancelled.
Necessary changes will be made in the relevant Act/ Rules/ Code etc. as per the requirement. The detailed procedure in this regard will be decided by the Revenue and Forest Department.
8) The duration of the power purchase agreement for wind power power generation projects under the said policy. It will be governed by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission. The period of open access is required to be at least 10 years to make the project financially viable. The final decision will be taken by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission. While developing such projects (Open Access/ Captive/ Group Captive/ Third Party), the producer/ consumer will be required to pay taxes/ duties etc. to the government accordingly. They will also have to mandatorily maintain the rates of duty and taxes applicable to their area-wise distribution companies.
However, the Open Access period for private use will continue to be applicable throughout the life of the project. Such projects will be entitled to receive transmission connection till the targets under this policy are met.
9) The project in the area/ district where the mineral is found must submit a" No-Objection Certificate" from the Department of Geology and Mining.
10) Hybrid wind power projects, integrated with other non-conventional energy sources and incorporating storage capacity, will be given priority.
11) Manual registration will be applicable to wind/ solar/ hybrid projects to be set up through competitive bidding by distribution companies/ SECI in the state as per the guidelines of the Central Government. Such projects will not be allowed under this policy.
(iii) Cane-based/ agro-residue based power generation projects:
1) The state can get additional electricity from the by-products available from sugar factories and agricultural industries. This will be beneficial for the farmers. Such projects need to be given a boost. As per the report of Vasantdada Sugar Institute, the state still has 1374 MW capacity. Under this policy, a target of 1350 MW is being set for sugarcane straw based/ agro residue based cogeneration projects.
Under this policy, the power generated from such projects can be used by the state's power distribution companies to meet their renewable energy purchase obligations. For projects registered with the Maha Urja, the basic facility consent will be given by the Maha Urja.
3) Power Purchase Agreements in the cogeneration projects shall be concluded without going through the tendering process till the objective is achieved. Page 13 of the Memorandum of Understanding on the terms and conditions set by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission
# Page 14
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
The power will be purchased by the power distribution company. The buyer will be allowed to enter into a power purchase agreement through a tender process after meeting the target.
(4) Water supply projects:
Non-conventional energy policy- In 2015, a target of 400 MW was set for small water projects, out of which only 20 MW has been achieved. In view of this, a target of 380 MW of new projects is being set in this policy. Under this policy, new projects will be required to obtain basic facility consent upon registration with the General Authority.
(ii) Power purchase agreements in small hydro power projects shall be concluded without going through the tendering process till the objective is achieved. Power will be procured by MSEDCL under the MoU at the rates fixed by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission and on the terms and conditions laid down. The buyer will be allowed to enter into a power purchase agreement through a tender process after meeting the target.
(5) Urban Solid Waste Based Power Generation Projects:
1) Organic and non-organic substances are produced in the area of local bodies in the state and their proper disposal is an important and necessary matter from the point of view of the environment. Therefore, there is a need to give some encouragement to such waste-to-energy projects. From such material it is possible to develop an independent power generation plant. A target of 200 MW has been set for such projects.
(2) The survey of the low pressure, high pressure, high pressure substations and transmission and distribution channels required for such projects shall be carried out jointly with the project holders of METRO or MSEDCL as the case may be. The work of the sub-station/ distribution channel to be taken up after the survey shall be carried out by the project holder at his own cost under the supervision of the company as per the technical outcome of the Mahatransport/ Distribution Company and as per the budget approved by him. Further, the evacuation mechanism will include strengthening or modification of substations, transmission and distribution channels. In addition, the evacuation system will include 11 KV or more channels from the plant to the substation.
3) Power Purchase Agreements in Urban Solid Waste to Power projects will be signed without going through the tendering process till the objective is achieved. The power will be procured by MSEDCL through a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on the terms and conditions laid down by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission (MERC). The buyer will be allowed to enter into a power purchase agreement through a tender process after meeting the target.
4) The power purchase agreement with the urban solid waste power generation plant will be in accordance with the power purchase agreement instead of the tender process.
5) The concerned administrative department will take a decision to implement the scheme.
Page 22 of 14.
# Page 15
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Taking into account the above, the objectives and financial requirements for development of transmission linked power generation projects from non-conventional energy sources under the Policy would be as follows:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A.A.  | Non-conventional energy sources                                                         | Objectives (m.w.) | Sources of funding                                                                                 |
| 1     | Solar power projects                                                                    | 12930             | through investments by private developers, central government, institutions, departments concerned |
| 2.    | Wind power projects                                                                     | 2500              |
| 3.    | Power Generation Projects including those based on sugarcane husk/ agricultural residue | 1350              |
| 4.    | Small Hydro Power Projects                                                              | 380               |
| 5.    | Urban Solid Waste Based Power Generation Projects                                       | 200               |
| Total | 17360                                                                                   |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part-2
Integrated Policy for Non-Transmission Projects of Power Generation from New and Renewable (Non-Conventional) Energy Sources of the State 2020.
Under this scheme, the following solar agricultural pumps, rooftop transmission-less/ hybrid solar power sets, solar hot water plants, solar power based plants for cooking, decentralized micro transmission projects, rural electrification, solar power based cold storage are being set up in the state for the next 5 years:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A.A.  | the plan/ project                                                 | Yearly target (capacity/ number) | Annual Financial Outlay (Rs.)                                                               |
| 1     | Rooftop and ground transmission-free/ hybrid solar power systems. | 52,000 sq.                       | private developers, central government, institutions, related departments,                  |
| 2     | Installation of solar pumps.                                      | 100,000 nos                      |
| 3     | Installation of solar pumps for water supply.                     | 2000 pumps                       | Private developers, Central Government (if available), Institutions, Departments concerned, |
| 4     | The Rural Electrification Program                                 | There are 10,000 homes           | 38                                                                                          |
| 5     | Decentralized Micro Grid Project.                                 | There are 20 villages            | 40                                                                                          |
| 6     | Solar Thermal Water Plant and Solar Power Plant for Cooking       | 55,000 sq.                       | Private developers, Central Government (if available), Institutions, Departments concerned, |
| 7     | Solar-powered cold storage                                        | Rs 800                           | private developers, central government (if available), institutions,                        |
| Total |                                                                   | 78                               |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
General guidelines:
The guidelines and technical specifications of the Central Government and Mpower will be followed for non-transmission solar power generation projects/ plants to be implemented under this policy.
Page 22 of 15.
# Page 16
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Also, it will be mandatory to use the highest improved technology issued by the Central Government from time to time in this regard and to comply with the guidelines of the General Power from time to time.
2) Under this policy, the procedures required for installation and commissioning of non-transmission projects/ plants, including simplified procedures for promoting the construction of the project with a view to effective implementation of the policy, will be separately issued by the Department of Power.
The power of attorney general shall have the power to grant technical approval for all projects (including projects of the Public Works Department and Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran) to be set up under this policy. For this, the executing agency will have to deposit one per cent of the total project cost with the Maha Urja.
4) If the project is to be implemented through Mahavirja, the amount will be charged for the project management fee (PMC) from 2% to 5% depending on the nature of the project.
5) The benchmark cost for the various plants to be installed under this policy will be announced annually by the General Power.
(6) If new and renewable energy plants are to be set up with funds from schemes other than those mentioned in this policy, it will be mandatory to obtain technical approval and technical measurements from the General Authority.
Under this policy, it will be mandatory for the manufacturers/ system integrators to register with Maha Urja for setting up solar power sets/ projects.
8) Non-transmission solar power sets/ projects to be set up under this policy will have to be registered with the General Power. The criteria for this will be determined by the Supreme Court.
(1) Installation of rooftop and ground transmission-free/ hybrid solar power systems:
Under this policy, the offices of government, semi-government, local bodies, aided educational institutions, social welfare department/ tribal department, ashramshalas and hostels, gaushalas and panjrapols, primary health centres under the health department, rural hospitals, agricultural produce market committees under the marketing department, cottage and micro industries as well as non-transmission/ hybrid solar power sets will be installed.
Out of these, transmission-free/ hybrid solar power sets of 1 to 100 KW capacity installed on rooftop and ground of the building will be eligible for financing.
3) Installation of rooftop and ground-based non-transmission/ hybrid solar power set should be as per the prescribed technical specifications and ratings issued by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India and Maharashtra Urja Vikas Nigam (MAHAP) from time to time. The commissioning agency will be responsible for installation, maintenance and repair of the rooftop and ground based anti-corrosion/ hybrid solar power set for a period of five years. Online through Mahawerja to implement the scheme
A portal will be created. Where before the implementation of this scheme, the Energy Department through Public Works Department
Page 22 of 16.
# Page 17
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Whether Efficient Equipment is installed or proposed, the scheme will be implemented by MAHAYURJA in coordination with the concerned departments.
4) Government, semi-government, local self-government institutions, social welfare department/ tribal department, ashramshalas and hostels, primary health centres under the health department, rural hospitals, etc. will be covered for installation of rooftop and ground transmission-less/ connected solar power sets, hybrid inverters and lithium ferrophosphate (LiFePO) type batteries.
The maximum capacity of the solar power set should be 100 kW.
For this purpose, a target of 12000 KWh per year is being fixed.
6) The concerned administrative departments will decide to implement the scheme by making necessary provisions in their budget.
The maximum capacity of the solar power set for installation of rooftop and ground transmission-free/ hybrid solar power sets in registered buildings of cooperative societies, cooperative housing societies, registrar cooperatives, registered buildings in apartment ownership, registered township buildings, charitable institutions/ dispensaries, aided educational institutions, gaushalas and cages should be 50 kW.
For this purpose, a target of 40000 KWh per year is being fixed.
9) The criteria and procedures for implementing the projects in this component will be decided by the Department of Energy in consultation with the General Power.
(2) Installation of solar agricultural pumps:
Under the Central Government's Kusum Scheme or Chief Minister's Solar Agriculture Pump Scheme, a maximum of 100000 non-transmission solar agricultural pumps will be installed to farmers with a capacity of 3/ 5/ 7.50 horsepower, taking into account the needs and demands of that year. Out of this, 77500 Nag Solar Krishi Pumps are planned to be distributed to the general category beneficiaries, in which the beneficiary share will be 10%. Out of the 10% beneficiary share for SC/ ST beneficiaries, 5% beneficiary share will be taken from SC/ ST beneficiaries. Accordingly, 13500 nos of solar agricultural pumps will be provided to the beneficiaries of Scheduled Castes and 9000 nos of solar agricultural pumps will be provided to the beneficiaries of Scheduled Tribes. Under the central government's Kusum Maha Abhiyan, 30 percent subsidy will be received from the central government. As mentioned by the Deputy Chief Minister (Planning and Finance) in the Budget Speech of 2020-21, 1,00,000 Nagas of solar agricultural pumps will be installed every year.
It will cost Rs 1950 crore. 585 crore may be available as grant from the Centre. Beneficiary share of Rs. 173 crore and the State Government's share is about Rs. 436 crore and the remaining Rs. An additional Rs 756 crore is expected to come from the electricity sales tax and green energy fund. Accordingly, the plan will be prepared and approved by the cabinet separately. Accordingly, solar agricultural pumps will be installed for farmers on an annual basis. The scheme will be implemented as per the guidelines issued by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE). On page 22 of 17
# Page 18
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Grants will be made available separately. The Chief Minister Solar Agriculture Pump Scheme of the state government can be linked to the Kusum scheme.
(3) Use of non-transmission solar pumps for supply of small water and tap water:
The central government has laid emphasis on providing piped water supply in rural areas. The use of solar pumps for public water supply schemes is useful for the supply of potable water to villages/ hamlets/ hamlets/ gram panchayats where electricity cannot be supplied in rural and remote areas. For this, the scheme will be implemented for minor water and tap water supply by installing solar-based pumps of 3, 5 and 7.5 horsepower capacity on the available sources like ponds/ wells/ coupons.
Under this, it is being decided to install 2,000 transmission-free solar pumps of 3, 5 and 7.5 horsepower per year in villages/ hamlets/ wards/ hamlets/ gram panchayats in the state as per the requirement.
Under this, villages/ hamlets/ villages with a population of up to 5000 as per technical eligibility will be eligible.
Under this, places where the supply of electricity for a public water supply scheme is not economical due to geographical conditions will be eligible.
Under this, villages which have not yet been provided electricity, villages which are completely dependent on hand pumps for drinking water, and villages which are getting interrupted electricity supply will be eligible and will be given priority.
Under this, the installation of non-transmission solar pumps will be required to be done as per the prescribed technical specifications and prescribed ratings given by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy from time to time.
The procedure and criteria for implementation will be decided by the Department of Energy in consultation with the General Power.
6) The concerned administrative departments will decide on the implementation of the scheme.
The rural electrification programme:
The Central and State Governments have given importance to electrification of households in remote villages/ hamlets/ hamlets where electricity does not reach through conventional energy sources. Accordingly, in the next 5 years, MSEDCL will provide solar home lights and fans to the villages/ villages/ hamlets which cannot be electrified through conventional methods, as per the technical parameters under the Saubhagya scheme.
Beneficiaries:- The households in the remote villages/ wadis/ padis of the state where electricity will not reach through traditional energy sources will be eligible.
Scheme:- Solar energy based household lights on 100% financial assistance basis for households in remote villages/ hamlets/ hamlets in the State where electricity does not reach through traditional energy sources.
Page 22 of 18.
# Page 19
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
A fan will be provided. The plant to be set up under the scheme will be contracted with the installer with a guarantee/ maintenance and repair period of five years.
Objective: To achieve the target of 10,000 solar home lights per year.
The State Government will allocate Rs. 38 crore. The procedure and criteria for implementation will be decided by the Department of Energy in consultation with the General Power.
(5) Decentralized Micro Grid Projects:
In the remote areas of the state, villages that cannot be electrified through traditional methods, decentralized micro-transmission projects through solar energy or other non-conventional energy will be implemented on 100% financial assistance basis. The on-line portal will be used for the measurement and measurement of electricity/ energy generated from the decentralized micro transmission projects. Approximately Rs. The estimated cost is Rs. 2.00 crore. The scheme will be implemented in 20 districts of the state. The State Government will allocate Rs. 40 crore. The procedure and criteria for implementation will be decided by the Department of Energy in consultation with the General Power. Funding will be provided annually.
(6) Installation of solar thermal water plants and solar energy based plants for cooking:
Solar water/ cooking plants with a capacity of at least 250 liters per day and above will be installed in restrooms, hostels, hospitals, clinics, prisons and training centers of government, semi-government, local bodies in the state.
Installation of solar power based plants for solar hot water/ cooking will be done as per the prescribed technical specifications and ratings given by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India and Maharashtra Urja Vikas Nigam (MAHAWARGA) from time to time.
The responsibility of installation, warranty and maintenance and repair of solar power based plants for solar hot water/ cooking will be of the concerned manufacturer/ system integrator for a period of 5 years.
4) An e-portal will be created on the website of MahaUrja to implement the scheme. The first-come-first-serve basis for registration on this portal will be followed.
A target of 50000 sq.m. per year will be set for installation of solar hot water plants.
A target of 5000 sq.m. per annum will be set for installation of solar based cooking plants.
6) The concerned administrative departments will decide on the implementation of the scheme.
The procedure and criteria for implementation will be decided by the Department of Energy in consultation with the General Power.
Page 22 of 19.
# Page 20
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
Solar-powered cold storage:
Co-operative societies, farmers groups, Farmer Producer Companies, Self Help Groups, individual farmers etc.
They can save traditional electricity by using solar energy to keep their farm products fresh for a longer period of time, as well as for longer cold storage.
Beneficiaries:- Cooperative Societies, Farmers Groups, Farmer Producer Companies, Self Help Groups, Individual Farmers, etc. in the state.
Scheme:- Under this scheme, cooperative societies, farmers groups, farmer producer companies, self-help groups, individual farmers, etc. will be given financial assistance.
A scheme will be implemented to set up solar energy based plants to store their products for a longer period of time. 800 projects are planned to be taken up every year under this scheme.
The concerned administrative departments will decide on the implementation of the scheme.
The Central Government provides financial assistance of 30% of the project cost for setting up solar based cold storage plants. For this, the concerned departments will be given all possible help.
The procedure and criteria for implementation will be decided by the Department of Energy in consultation with the General Power.
To provide information to the General Energy Department about all non-conventional energy programs implemented by all government/ semi-government, government-sponsored, government-affiliated, etc. departments, offices, institutions in the state.
For binding:
Various schemes, projects, plants based on non-conventional energy through various government/ semi-government, government-sponsored, government-recognized departments, offices, institutions in the state. Funds are available for District Planning Committees, Local Schemes, etc. Central Government, State Government, Bureau of Indian Standards, etc.
They have to be worked out according to the parameters, technical parameters etc. It is also necessary to implement an insurance policy for the next five years and repair and maintenance of the plant after the installation of the project plan. All of these are included in the plan.
In view of this, it is being made mandatory to provide information to the General Energy Department about the implementation of all non-conventional energy-based schemes, projects, plants, etc. implemented by all government/ semi-government agencies in the state. A web portal will be made available for this.
Funding for the program:
Provision of funds for schemes to be implemented under the Policy Funds from Central Government Grants/ Green Energy Fund/ Urban Local Bodies/ State Government (NRSE)/ Special Component Schemes/ Tribal Sub Plan/ other Administrative Departments may be used for this purpose.
Page 22 of 20.
# Page 21
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
It will be made available from sources such as District Development Funds/ Central and International Financial Assistance Agencies etc.
On provision for simple expenditure of energy:
Under this policy, the Maharashtra Energy Development Agency will be allowed to spend 2% of the total provision for the tender process, online portal creation, technical inspection cost, manpower, vehicles, etc. for the implementation of the scheme. For this purpose, the Government will provide 2% of the project cost to the Mahaviralya by including it in the project cost while providing funds for the expenditure of the Government aided scheme. Besides, if any local body wants to implement innovative non-conventional schemes from its funds, then it will be mandatory to get technical approval for such schemes from the General Authority.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Interim changes in the targets and financial provisions proposed for implementation of the above scheme |
| If necessary, the approval of the state government will be mandatory for this.                          |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This Government decision was taken with the concurrence of the Planning Department and their Informal Reference No. 160/1461, dt. 1st December, 2020 as well as with the concurrence of the Finance Department and vide their Informal Reference No. It is being issued in accordance with the agreement given by them as on December 31, 2020.
The departments are Agriculture, Forest, Environment, Forest, Environment, Forest, Environment, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Climate Change.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| The decision is available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in. |
| The digital order has been issued with serial number 202012311724507310                           |
| A signature is being taken.                                                                       |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra,
Nanasaheb
Rajaram Dhane SerialNumber= 6c39e2858150dbdfcfe6cd25ed08adf59f4d2fd8c1ede1730735 (Nanasaheb Dhane)
Under Secretary, Government of Maharashtra
(1) Ma. Principal Secretary to the Governor, Raj Bhavan, Mumbai. Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister, Maharashtra State, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 3) Private Secretary to all Ministers/ Ministers of State, Mumbai, 4) Leader of Opposition, Legislative Assembly/ Legislative Council, Vidhan Bhavan, Mumbai, 21 out of 22
# Page 22
Government Resolution No: APAW-2020/ PR No.137/ URJA-7
5) All Members of Legislative Assembly, Vidhan Bhavan, Mumbai, 6) Chief Secretary, Maharashtra State, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 7) Additional Chief Secretary (Finance), Finance Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 8) Principal Secretary (Planning), Planning Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 9) Personal Assistant to all Additional Chief Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries, all Ministerial Departments, 10) All Divisional Commissioners, 11) All Collectors, 12) Chief Executive Officers, all Zilla Parishads, 13) Accountant General, Maharashtra State, Mumbai/ Nagpur, 14) Resident Audit Officer, Mumbai, 15) Secretary, Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission, Mumbai (by letter), 16) Managing Director, Maharashtra State Electricity Board, the Company under the aegis of the Company. Chairman and Managing Director, Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited. Chairman and Managing Director, Maharashtra State Power Generation Company Limited. Chairman and Managing Director, Maharashtra State Power Transmission Company Limited. Director General, Maharashtra Power Development Agency (General Power), Pune, 21) Deputy Secretary/ Power-3, Industries, Energy and Labour Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 22) All the offices of Energy Sub-Division, Industries, Energy and Labour Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 23) Chief Inspector of Electricity, Industries, Energy and Labour Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
24. Selection Nasti, Power-7, Industries, Energy and Labour Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
Page 22 of 22.