# Page 1
97th September is celebrated as the birth anniversary of Staat Vishwakarma in all the offices under the Department of Labour.
about doing it.
Government of Maharashtra
Industries, Energy, Labour and Mining Department
Government Circular No: Sankorn-2024 / Q. No.189 / Kam-9
Madam Kama Marg, Martyr Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032.
Date: 1st of August, 2025
Reference: - The government's serial number. Circular dated September 19, 2024.
Government Circular: -
The image of Shri Magwan Vishwakarma should be installed in all the offices under the Labour Department in the state. Also, since September 17 is the birth anniversary of Shri Bhagwan Vishwakarma, his birth anniversary should be celebrated by worshipping his image. However, If September 17 is a government holiday, Shri Bhagwan Vishwakarma's birth anniversary should be celebrated on the office day next to the holiday.
The Government Circular is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www-.maharashtra.gov.in with the computer code 2025080112447510. The circular is being digitally signed and authenticated.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra
SWAPNIL YASHWANTRAO
K A p A D N | S serial ae sour Cri PhD DDFO
(To the dreamer)
Deputy Secretary, Government of Maharashtra As per due process: 0 Development Commissioner, Unorganized Labour, Prabhadevi Road, Mumbai.
Ww. Commissioner of Labour, State of Maharashtra, Mumbai. Private Secretary to the Hon'ble Minister (Labour), Mantralaya, Mumbai.
08 Private Secretary to CMS, MoS (Labour), Mantralaya, Mumbai.
RAS Assistant to the Principal Secretary (Labour), Mantralaya, Mumbai.
Director, Directorate General of Industrial Safety and Health, Bandra (East), Mumbai.
Director, Vapke, Bandra (East), Mumbai.
Narayan Meghaji Lokhande, Director, Maharashtra Institute of Labour Sciences, Parel, Mumbai / Nagpur.
PA Welfare Commissioner, Maharashtra Labour Welfare Board, Prabhadevi, Mumbai 10. Manager, Industrial and Labour Court, Administrative Building, Mumbai 11. Secretary and CEO, Maharashtra Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Board, Bandra (East) Mumbai.
12. Selective workers - 9.
On IS OS 2K yer, it's ok, it's ok, it's ok, it's ok.