# Page 1
Revised policy on Sand/ Sand
The Government of Maharashtra
the Revenue and Forest Department
Government Resolution No. Gaukhni- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ Kh-1,
Rajguru Chowk,
Madame Cama Road, Mantralaya, Mumbai-32
Date: January 28, 2022.
Government Resolution, Revenue and Forest Department No.: Gaukhani- 10/1014/ PR No. 500/ B, dated: 21st May, 2015.
Government Resolution, Revenue and Forest Department No. Gaukhini- 10/0219/ Q. No.9/ Kh-1, dated: 3rd September, 2019.
Chapter V of the Maharashtra Minor Mineral Exploration (Development and Regulation) Rules, 2013.
The Proposal:
Chapter V of the Maharashtra Minor Mineral Exploration (Development and Regulation) Rules, 2013, provides for the release of sand/ sand from nullahs, river and creek beds and Rule 70 provides that" the procedure regarding terms and conditions of auction, appropriation etc. shall be specified by the Government from time to time." Accordingly, the Government had earlier issued a Government Resolution No. Gaukhani- 10/1014/ P.S. No.500/ B.D. The Policy on Discharge of Sand/ Sand in the Bay Area was announced on 21.05.2015. Similarly, No. Gauhani- 10/0219/ Q. No.9/ Kh, Dy. The Policy on Discharge of Sand/ Sand in River Basins has been notified on 3rd September, 2019.
Sand/ sand mining As per the said policy dated 21.5.2015, the cost of hand sand mining for traditional manual/ submersible sand mining was being increased by 15% per annum and the cost of hand mining for manual/ submersible sand mining was being fixed at par with the auction price for mechanized excavators. Due to this, complaints of a huge increase in the price of hand-pulled/ sand-pulled sand were received. Regarding these complaints. The meeting was held under the chairmanship of the minister.
Similarly, the Department of Mines, Government of India released the Sand Mining Framework-2018 in March, 2018, in which some of the major states of the country were studied and some guidelines were given regarding the necessary aspects while extracting sand/ sand. Also Ma. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) vide O.A.No. 368/2015 dated 19/09/2018 has directed the Centre
# Page 2
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
In coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, the government had directed to make changes in the policy in accordance with the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016 and Sand Mining Framework, 2018. Similarly, Ma. A Public Interest Litigation (PIL) has been filed in the Bombay High Court. 110/2018. The state government assured the High Court that it would formulate a revised sand policy. Accordingly, a committee headed by the Director, Directorate of Geology and Mining, was constituted to prepare a new sand/ sand release policy in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India and studied the sand policies of some of the major States. According to the A new revised Sand/ Sand Export Policy has been issued vide Government Resolution dated 3.9.2019.
Sand/ sand mining in river bed As per the said Government decision dated 3.9.2019, the proposal for environmental clearance had to be submitted to the Environment Department through the Collector's Office before the sand was put in the advertisement for auction. It has been observed that a lot of time is being wasted after the preparation of the mining plan till the environmental clearance is obtained. It was also observed that in some places, all the hard work and time of the government machinery is wasted if the auction is not successful after obtaining environmental clearance for the sand.
Therefore, after the survey and mining plan of the sand blocks was prepared by the Collector's Office, the matter of conducting an auction of these sand blocks and obtaining environmental clearance through the successful auctioneer was under the consideration of the government.
The government has decided to increase the hand price of sand at the rate of 6 percent per annum as per the environmental clearance. It has also been observed that the hand price of sandalwood has been increasing substantially since 3.9.2019. Therefore, the auctioneers are not keen to participate in the auction of sand. As a result, the sand auction is not successful and the government's revenue is also lost by increasing the amount of illegal sand mining from these sand pits. Therefore, the matter of re-fixing the hand price of sand auction was also under the consideration of the government.
DL-A 28032020-218948, Dy. It was released on March 28, 2020.
The sand policy. After the issue of 3.9.2019, the matter was under consideration of the Government to include these items in the provisions of the Sand Policy as per the above directions. Accordingly, the Divisional Commissioner, Nashik Division, Nashik was directed to study the sand policy of the States of Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh and submit amendments/ recommendations in the prevailing sand policy. Sand Policy in accordance with the report submitted by the Divisional Commissioner, Nashik Division, Nashik. Page 2 of 33 to provide more updated directions in 3.9.2019
# Page 3
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
A decision has been taken to remove sand from the riverbed. Policy dated 21.5.2015 and D. The Government was contemplating to formulate a single comprehensive policy by consolidating the policy dated 3.9.2019.
Government's decision:
In the light of the discussion in the Preamble, the relevant Government Decision on the policy on sand/ sand extraction. 21.05.2015 and D. 03.09.2019, the Government prescribes the following new guidelines for the following revised procedures in respect of sand/ sand quarrying in the basin and river beds in the State:
Case No. 1
Procedure for sand/ sand extraction and transportation
Survey and determination of sand/ sand groups to facilitate navigation in the coastal areas of Maharashtra: (a) Since sand/ sand is required to be excavated from time to time to facilitate navigation in the coastal areas of Maharashtra, the Maharashtra Maritime Board shall conduct a survey in the month of September every year to determine the sand/ sand groups in such places.
The Maharashtra Maritime Board shall also determine the estimated sand/ sand stock available in the concerned sand/ sand group, the depth to be excavated, the mechanical means to be used for excavation or how and if mechanical means are to be used, how many suction pumps/ dredgers to be installed in that area.
(b) The Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board shall, after determining the sand/ sand groups, their geographical location, the estimated stock of sand/ sand, the quantity of excavation to be done to facilitate the shipping route and the available approaches etc. in the area to be excavated for drying the shipping route from the coastal area, authorize the concerned Collector to make arrangements for sand/ sand excavation from the sand/ sand groups identified as above by the Maharashtra Maritime Board and to keep a check on the system.
(c) The Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra, for the traditional occupation of sand/ sand mining by immersion/ hand ploughing method for the local people in the coastal areas of Maharashtra.
Page 3 of 3
# Page 4
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
On behalf of the Maritime Board, the concerned District Collector/ Additional Collector shall mark the" Reserved Group for Sand/ Sand Mining by Submerged/ Hand-Made by Vinalilao Licensing System" as per the recommendation of the District Level Sand Control Committee.
(d) In order to facilitate the movement of vessels, the groups where the use of mechanical means such as suction pumps or dredgers is required for sand/ sand mining, the concerned Collector/ Additional Collector on behalf of the Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board shall mark as' Reserved Groups for sand/ sand mining by mechanical means" on the recommendation of the District Level Sand Control Committee.
Survey and determination of sand/ sand groups in river bed: 1) On-site inspection of sand groups in river bed shall be carried out by the following technical sub-committee.
i) Tahsildar- Chairman ii) Deputy Engineer, Water Resources Department- Member iii) Junior Geologist (nominated by Directorate of Geology Mining). Member (iv) Junior Geologist (nominated by Ground Water Survey and Development Agency)- Member (v) Representative of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board Department- Member
(ii) The Technical Sub-Committee shall not determine the sand/ sand groups in areas where sand mining in areas of depletion and continuous scarcity affects the environment and availability of drinking water.
(3) The Technical Sub-Committee shall make recommendations to the Taluk Level Sand Control Committee as to whether or not the sand blocks are suitable for excavation after taking into consideration the local rainfall and geographical conditions and other environmentally friendly factors while determining the sand blocks.
(ii) the Committee on Water Resources:
(1) Taluka Level Sand Monitoring Committee- Taluka level Sand Monitoring Committee will be formed for each Taluka of the district. (This Committee shall hereinafter be referred to as the" Taluk Level Committee." )
Page 3 of 4
# Page 5
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
The composition of the committee will be as follows:
1) Sub Divisional Officer-Chairman 2) Deputy Divisional Police Officer-Member 3) Junior Geologist (nominated by Directorate of Geology and Mining)-Member 4) Junior Geologist (nominated by Ground Water Survey and Development System)-Member 5) Block Development Officer, Panchayat Samiti Member 6) Deputy Engineer, Public Works Department 7) Deputy Engineer, Water Resources Department Member 8) Representative of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board Member 9) Representative of Regional Transport Officer Member 10) Tehsildar-Member Secretary
The Chairman of the Committee may appoint other experts and officers as invited members to advise and guide him on a particular issue.
(2) District Sand Monitoring Committee- A District Sand Monitoring Committee will be constituted in each district to monitor the entire process of sand/ sand release. (hereinafter referred to as the" District Committee"). The composition of the committee will be as follows: 1) Collector, 2) Chief Executive Officer, 3) Superintendent of Police/ Commissioner of Police, 4) Additional Collector, 5) Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, 6) Executive Engineer, Water Resources Department, 7) Deputy Conservator of Forests, 8) Regional Transport Officer, 9) Regional Officer, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board, 10) Senior Geologist, Ground Water Survey System, 11) District Mining Officer-Member Secretary
Page 33 of 3
# Page 6
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
The Chairman of the Committee may appoint other experts and officers as invited members to advise and guide him on a particular issue.
(iii) Powers and Functions of Sand Control Committee: (a) Taluk Level Sand/ Sand Control Committee: (i) Taluk Level Committee shall meet at least once in two months.
Submission of proposal to the District Level Committee with recommendation in respect of: i) Reservation of sand blocks for Government housing schemes meant for economically weaker sections as per the provisions of Government Notification No. Gaukhni- 10/0215/ PR. No. 92/ B, dated 17th November, 2018.
(ii) Reservation of sand blocks for mining at the rate of ownership from an environmentally permitted wilderness to a local resident for his domestic or agricultural purposes in accordance with the provisions of Government Notification, No. Gaukhni- 10/0215/ Q.No.92/ B, dated 17th November, 2018.
iii) Reservation of sand in the name of any agency nominated by him for projects/ schemes of the Central/ State Government or public authorities under its control.
(iv) Reservation of river bed sand for Maharashtra State Mining Corporation.
(v) To recommend the selection of sand blocks for auction.
3) The Taluk Level Committee shall determine the approximate quantity of sand to be mined from the sandbags identified for sand mining. When determining the sand dunes, it will be necessary to present a standardized map with the latitude and longitude of this group.
The Taluk Level Committee will assist the District Level Committee in preparing the District Survey Report as per the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016 and Sand Mining Framework, 2018 and the directions given by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time.
5) The Taluk Level Committee will submit a joint site survey report to the District Level Committee with complete documents and clear recommendations regarding the removal of sand from the designated online e-auction system or reserving the said group for government work.
Page 3 of 3
# Page 7
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(6) The Committee shall control and supervise the manner in which sand mining is being carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of the environmental clearance.
The Committee shall make necessary recommendations to the District Level Sand Control Committee for effective implementation of the policy.
The Committee will also recommend the identification of sand deposits available in the area of operation and the identification of other sources (e.g. sand mixed with soil, dam sand, etc.) as an alternative to sand mining in the river bed.
(9) The Committee shall determine the categories for the notified areas in accordance with the provisions of the PESA Act, 2011 or as amended from time to time.
10) In addition to the above, the Taluk Level Committee shall discharge the responsibilities assigned to it from time to time by the District Level Sand Control Committee.
(a) The District Committee:
The Committee shall meet at least once in three months.
2) The committee for proper solar control can do the digitization of sandbags in the district through the Maharashtra Remote Sensing System or an approved agent as per the requirement.
3) After considering the proposals received from the Taluk Level Committees and making necessary changes in them, if required, the District Level Committee shall take action as follows: i) As per the provisions of the Government Notification, No. Gaukhni- 10/0215/ PR. No.92/ B, dated 17th November, 2018, sandbags shall be reserved for the housing schemes of the Government for the economically weaker sections.
(ii) The Government shall reserve sandbags for supply to local residents for their domestic or agricultural purposes at the rate of ownership from the Environment Permitted Wildcat as per the provisions of Notification No. Gaukhni- 10/0215/ Q. No.92/ B, dated 17th November, 2018.
(iii) Sand blocks shall be reserved for grant of licences to local persons and local bodies for extraction of sand by traditional methods like hand-pulling/ immersion.
(iv) The Maharashtra State Mining Corporation will take a decision on reserving the sand in the river basin for mining.
v) Sand blocks will be identified for auction.
Page 3 of 7
# Page 8
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
4) The above. 3 shall provide recommendation for environmental clearance of sand dunes for the purposes mentioned in this section.
5) All the procedures related to sandbagging and excavation. The National Green Tribunal shall ensure compliance with the directions issued by it from time to time as well as the provisions contained in the notification issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time.
The committee will have the power to appoint an approved consultant for environmental clearance and other related works and for preparing the District Survey Report.
7) The price of the hand for the sand auction process should be fixed in the form of per-brush or per-metric ton as the case may be, as per the instructions of the Government in this regard.
(8) The Committee shall take appropriate decisions on sand/ sand mining/ development and transportation as may be required.
The Committee shall issue necessary instructions to the officers of the Government/ Semi-Government and local bodies in the district for the effective implementation of this decision.
10) Subject to the provisions, terms and conditions prescribed by this Government decision, the Committee shall recommend to the Collector to grant permission for sand mining or grant of sand mining license.
11) The responsibilities of the Vigilance Committees for verifying complaints of illegal mining and transportation of minor minerals will be carried out in a limited manner.
IV) Recommendation of Gram Sabha for auction of river bed sand/ sand- After determining the sand/ sand category in the river bed, it will be mandatory to take the recommendation of Gram Sabha for auction of the said sand category. After receiving the reference from the Gram Panchayat, it will be mandatory for the Gram Panchayat to convene the Gram Sabha and take a decision on it within one month. If the Gram Sabha gives a negative resolution, the Gram Sabha should be held under the chairmanship of the Sub-Divisional Officer (Revenue) and based on his recommendation, the sand auction should be recommended to the District Level Sand Control Committee.
(v) Reservation of sand blocks for projects of various departments of the State Government: Sand blocks may be reserved for projects/ schemes of the Central/ State Government or Public Authorities under its control in the name of any agency nominated by it. 8 out of 33 pages of sand required for such projects from such reserve sandbags
# Page 9
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
The Collector shall have the power to grant permits for making available for such government work the price of sand mentioned in the budget of the concerned government works in the district for excavation or the amount of ownership of sand fixed by the government from time to time, whichever is higher.
(vi) Reservation of river bed sand for Maharashtra State Mining Corporation:
(1) The Collector may, on a voluntary basis or on the demand of the Maharashtra State Mining Corporation, reserve sand for quarrying and sale by the Sand Mining Corporation in the district.
(2) The Corporation may carry out sand mining operations from the said sand blocks either by itself or through an agent.
(3) The Corporation shall establish a depot for the storage and sale of sand extracted from such sandbags and sell the sand at a price to be pre-approved by the Government.
(4) The Government shall determine the amount of ownership tax at the rate of sand determined from time to time from the amount received from the sale of sand.
5) Transport passes will be issued under the mahakhanij system by the concerned collector for the transportation of sand sold by the corporation.
Case No. 2
. The District Collectors will prepare a time bound mining plan before auctioning of sand blocks as per the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016 and 2020 and the Sand Mining Framework, 2018 and the directions issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time.
Environmental Clearance- 1. Environmental Clearance for sand/ sand quarrying from sand beds in the Bay of Bengal. The Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition (C) No. In 19628-19629/2009. As per the order dated 27/02/2012 and Hon. The National Green Tribunal, Western Division, Bench, Pune, vide Application No. 34 (THC)/ 2013 (WZ) dated 29.05.2014, it shall be necessary to take action for obtaining environmental clearance by the Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board, as per the provisions of the notification (EIA Notification-2006) dated 14th September, 2006 of the Department of Environment and Forests, Government of India, before sand/ sand mining.
Page 33 of 9.
# Page 10
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(a) No environmental clearance is required for grant of sand/ sand mining licences to local persons and entities engaged in traditional occupation from the" reserve groups for sand/ sand mining through submersible/ hand-pump method." In this regard, the concerned District Collectors will take action as per the Office Order dated 08.11.2011 of the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests.
(b) for sand/ sand excavation in" Reserved Group for sand/ sand excavation by mechanical means." The Supreme Court, The High Court, Ma. As per the directions issued by the National Green Tribunal from time to time and the provisions of the notification issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time, environmental clearance and ancillary matters are required to be processed before mining of minor minerals.
Sand cannot be mined without obtaining environmental clearance. For this, an Accredited Environment Consultant will be appointed as per the provisions of the notification dated September 14, 2006 of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India.
The expenditure for this purpose may be covered as per the provisions of the Government Notification, Industries, Energy and Labour Department, dated 1st September, 2016. The proposal for funds required for environmental clearance should be submitted by the CEO, Maharashtra Maritime Board to the Managing Director, Maharashtra State Mining Corporation, Nagpur.
(c) The Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board shall be required to obtain prior approval of the Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority for sand/ sand mining in the Coastal Regulation Zone.
2) Environmental clearance for sand/ sand mining in river basin-
(a) M. The Supreme Court, The High Court, Ma. Environmental clearances and ancillary matters are required to be dealt with in accordance with the directions issued by the National Green Tribunal from time to time and the provisions contained in the notification issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time. Sand cannot be mined without obtaining environmental clearance.
Page 33 of 10
# Page 11
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
After the auction of sand in the district, the successful bidder will be given a Letter of Intent (LOI) to the bidder who has been approved. The successful bidder will be responsible for obtaining environmental clearance on the basis of this letter of intent.
(c) The process of obtaining approval of the Expert Appraisal Committee and the Environment Impact Assessment Authority, as the case may be, as per the notification of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, issued from time to time, before sand mining from sand/ sand blocks, shall be done after the completion of the auction process.
(d) Sand cannot be mined without entering into an agreement for payment of the balance amount after obtaining environmental clearance.
(e) The Tahsildar of the concerned Taluk, the concerned Deputy Divisional Officer, the District Mining Officer and the Additional Collector shall be responsible for periodically inspecting whether the conditions and conditions mentioned in the environmental clearance by the Environmental Impact Management Authority as the case may be are properly complied with by the auctioneer.
(f) The Tahsildar shall submit a report to the Environment Department every six months through the District Mining Officer regarding action to be taken under the Environment Protection Act, 1986, in addition to action to be taken under the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966, in the case of auctioneers who violate the terms and conditions of the environmental clearance.
Case No. 3
Fixation of Upset Price for Auction of Sand:
(a) The period of excavation of sand blocks may be up to five years from the date of sanction. Also, the area of sand dunes can be up to 5 hectares. Accordingly, the process of determination of sand blocks, the process of mining sand in the group and the process of determining the hand price of that sand block will be as follows:
(i) The limits of excavation to be carried out during the period of auction shall be determined on the map of the sand quarries concerned and at the field level as per the annual plan for that year in the mining plan.
Page 33 of 11.
# Page 12
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(ii) The amount of ownership of sand determined by the Government from time to time and the amount that comes after multiplying the excavation of sand from the sand quarries concerned shall be fixed as the upset price of such sand quarries.
(iii) The price of the said hand should be declared in the sand auction advertisement.
iv) The cost of the arm shall be per tonne or per metric tonne as the case may be.
(v) It shall be the responsibility of the auctioneer to ensure that no re-excavation takes place in the area where the excavation has been completed as per the mining plan.
(vi) After two years, the method of determining the value of the hand will be changed as per the requirement after reviewing the increase in revenue.
(i) The Collector/ Additional Collector shall take into account the available stock of sand for release in each sand group in order to determine the cost of sand/ sand for hand groups to be reserved for hand pits and sinks.
(ii) the prevailing propriety in granting licences to local businessmen in the relevant sand blocks who carry on business in the traditional manner through hand looms and sinks or, as the case may be,
The amount of grant of permits for sand mining by hand-pulling and immersion at the rate of one metric ton should be taken into account.
Case No. 4
(a) Any person or company/ institution shall be ineligible to participate in the auction on the following grounds: 1. Persons ignorant, insolvent or insolvent by age or 2. Persons holding office of profit in the Central or State Government or 3. Persons/ institutions whose dues or dead rent of ownership of minor minerals have been paid.
Page 33 of 12.
# Page 13
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
5. If the turnover in the immediately preceding financial year is less than the prescribed limit- (Minimum 5% of the net worth for individuals and minimum 10% of the net worth for institutions and companies).
(b) The person/ entity participating in the auction shall have proof of regular filing of income tax, PAN number, GSTIN number of the Goods and Services Tax Department.
(c) The tender application fee for individuals/ institutions who wish to bid for the auction shall be Rs. 10.00 lakh or less than Rs. 2,000/- and Rs. 10.00 lakh and above Rs. 5,000/- to be paid by cheque in the name of the District Collector of the concerned district or in such manner as the Collector may notify.
(d) The person/ institution participating in the auction shall pay 25% of the amount of the upset price of the auction as the amount quoted along with the tender.
(2) Authority for auction of sand group:
(a) All the sand blocks in the district shall be auctioned at the district level under the control of the Collector.
(b) if a sandbag falls jointly between two districts in a revenue division, the two Collectors shall, after joint inspection and consultation, determine it as a joint sandbag and submit a report to the Divisional Commissioner in this regard. Thereafter, the Divisional Commissioner shall direct one of the two District Collectors to proceed with the auction of such joint sand blocks. The amount received in such auctions should be divided between the two districts according to the quantity of sand.
(a) in cases where a sandbag falls jointly between two districts of the two Revenue Divisions, the two Collectors shall, after joint inspection and consultation, submit a report to the two Divisional Commissioners concerned. The Joint Collector shall direct one of the two District Collectors, in consultation with the Divisional Commissioner, to conduct the auction.
Page 33 of 13.
# Page 14
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
Sand mining should be completed. The amount received in such auctions should be divided between the two districts according to the quantity of sand.
If there is no consensus between the two Divisional Commissioners regarding the auction of such joint sand blocks, a self-explanatory proposal should be submitted to the Government for decision.
Case No. 5
Sand/ Sand Auction Procedure
The sand blocks recommended for auction by the District Sand Control Committee should be auctioned through e-tendering/ e-auction method.
(1) All the sand. The Supreme Court, The High Court, Ma. The directions issued by the National Green Tribunal from time to time as well as the notification issued from time to time by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, shall be prescribed as per the provisions of the Act.
(2) The period of auction shall be inclusive of the period of monsoon. The monsoon season will be from June 10 to September 30 and sand mining will not be allowed during this period. This should be made clear to all those involved in the auction.
(3) In determining the period of excavation, the following factors should be considered:
(a) Annual rate of recharging of sand.
(b) Ground Water Survey Development System and Feasibility Report of Irrigation Department regarding availability of sand.
(c) the local and geographical conditions specified in the environmental permit and mining plan.
(d) The guidelines on Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016 and 2020 and the Sand Mining Framework, 2018, as well as the guidelines issued by the Central and State Governments from time to time.
(4) The advertisement for the auction of sand/ sand group should be published at least 15 days before the auction in two major newspapers of the district. Its copies should be pasted on the notice board in the office of all the Regional Revenue Officers. Advertisement should also be published on the government website.
(5) Period of excavation, survey number of sand/ sand group, number of sand/ sand group, name of sand/ sand group, estimated sand/ sand group/ estimated sand/ estimated sand/ estimated sand in the sand/ sand group/ 14 out of 33
# Page 15
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
Upset price of sand and sand/ sand group should be mentioned prominently.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the concerned auctioneer to ascertain before the auction whether the sand/ sand category mentioned in the advertisement has the required sand stock, whether the required roads are available for transportation, whether the sand in the sand category is mixed with soil or not.
No complaint in this regard will be entertained after the sand is mined by the auctioneer in possession of the sand/ sand group. The advertisement should also clearly state that no request for replacement of sand blocks or refund of proportionate amount collected by the government for sand auction will be entertained.
(7) Every person/ institution desirous of participating in the auction and filling the tender shall pay the amount at the time of submission of tender through RTGS/ NEFT or in such manner as may be notified by the Collector.
(8) If any complaints/ objections/ suggestions are received regarding the proposed auction, the District Collector/ Additional Collector and the Divisional Commissioner in case of joint sand blocks shall examine/ investigate the same and take appropriate decision regarding the process of auction of the sand blocks concerned if they are convinced that there are strong reasons for not conducting the auction.
(9) The Divisional Commissioner shall make arrangements as mentioned below for auctioning of sand/ sand blocks in all the districts of his division, preferably on a single day.
(a) Group-wise auction of all the sand/ sand groups identified for release of sand/ sand in the district shall be held on the same day at the district headquarters.
(b) If on the day of the auction, the proceedings of the auction of all the sand blocks are not completed, the proceedings shall be continued during office hours on the following morning.
(a) The auction of all sand blocks in the district shall be conducted under the personal control and supervision of the Collector or Additional Collector concerned. The Collector or Additional Collector cannot assign this work to any other officer under any circumstances.
Page 33 of 15.
# Page 16
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(d) In the case of composite sand blocks, the process of auction shall be carried out under the personal control and supervision of the concerned Divisional Commissioner. The Divisional Commissioner cannot assign this work to any other officer under any circumstances.
Case No. 6
(1) In all the auctions conducted through e-tendering and e-auction mode, the auction bid shall be initiated at a price higher than the hand price published by the Government.
The minimum bid amount for the e-auction is Rs. It is mandatory to increase it to 1000.
(2) The highest bidder shall be deemed to be the successful bidder.
(3) The successful bidder shall issue a Letter of Intent (LOI) after paying the total 25% of the auction amount to the office of the Collector/ Divisional Commissioner within 48 hours of the day of auction.
(4) The Auctioneer shall give an undertaking that he will pay 75% of the bid amount within the prescribed time from the date of auction. 100/- will be required to be submitted.
(5) The environmental clearance shall be taken in accordance with the quantity of sand quarried for a period not exceeding five years as specified in the mining plan for the period up to the completion of quarrying.
(6) After receiving the environmental clearance from the successful bidder and submitting it to the Collector, the remaining 75% shall be paid to the Collector or Divisional Commissioner, as the case may be, within 30 days thereafter. If the bidder does not submit the required proposal for environmental clearance to the Department of Environment within 45 days from the date of auction, 10% of the amount of the issue shall be charged to the bidder as penal amount.
(7) The Government shall enter into an agreement with the highest bidder after payment of the amount by the highest bidder. And only then will the sand be taken over.
(8) The person participating in the auction whose bid/ tender has not been accepted, the amount paid for participating in the auction (EMD) shall be refunded as soon as the auction proceedings are over.
Page 33 of 16.
# Page 17
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(9) The bidder whose highest bid is accepted shall deposit a cheque of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) towards survey fee or such other appropriate amount as may be required, in the name of Deputy Director or Senior Geologist, Ground Water Survey and Development Agency, at the Collectorate.
(10) The decision to accept or reject the offer of the highest bid in the auction/ tender shall be taken by the Additional Collector/ Collector or the Divisional Commissioner, as the case may be, and the decision shall be communicated to the concerned on the day of the auction.
If the decision to reject the tender is taken, the detailed reasons should be recorded.
(11) In exceptional circumstances, the Collector shall have the power to extend the time limit for payment of 3/4 th and 75% of the bid amount by another 15 days, after recording the reasons therefor. However, in such a situation, the auctioneer will have to pay interest at the rate of 15 per cent per annum on the delayed payment. Beyond this, the government will have the power to extend the deadline for payment of 75 per cent of the auction amount in case of delay due to exceptional circumstances.
(12) On the agreement to be entered into with the successful bidder in respect of the auction of sand/ sand, the amount of stamp duty as applicable as per the provisions of the Maharashtra Stamp Act shall be required to be paid by the concerned bidder. Or it will be mandatory to pay the stamp duty as per the prevailing government decision in this regard.
(13) The auctioneer/ licensee shall, at the time of entering into the agreement, be required to keep an amount equal to 20% of the hand price as a reserve amount with the Collector/ Additional Collector or Divisional Commissioner, as the case may be, for due compliance of the terms and conditions of the auction. This amount will be refunded on expiry of the period of auction/ licence, if the auctioneer/ licensee duly complies with all the terms and conditions during the period of auction/ licence. Any non-compliance with the terms and conditions will result in forfeiture of funds.
(14) It shall be mandatory for the auctioneer/ licensee to pay to the Zilla Parishad/ Panchayat Samiti as well as the taxes/ fees prescribed by the Government and the amount of the contribution for the District Mineral Establishment as may be determined by the Government from time to time.
(15) The actual possession of the sand site shall be given to the auctioneer within seven days of the late signing of the agreement. Possession of sand/ sand site to be confirmed to the auctioneer within seven days
Page 33 of 17
# Page 18
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
Disciplinary action should be taken against the officers/ employees responsible for it if not given without reason.
(16) A panchnama shall be made before the Tahsildar or the District Mining Officer while handing over the possession of the sand pit to the auctioneer and taking back the possession. If there are potholes in the sand pit, it should be mentioned in the panchnama. This should also be done using drones.
(17) The auctioneer shall be bound to use the mahakhanij system or such system as may be prescribed by the Government.
(ii) Procedure to be followed in case of non-auction of sand/ sand group in re-seeding and re-seeding:
(1) The auctioneer shall not be given possession of sand/ sand if he does not pay the remaining 3/4 th of the amount due to him within the prescribed period and does not enter into an agreement within the prescribed period. 1/4 th of the amount assured by such auctioneer should be forfeited and such sand/ sand group should be reallocated.
(2) If the sand/ sand auction is cancelled for any reason, such sand/ sand should be re-auctioned.
(3) In case of re-auction or re-auction, if the price is less than the previous auction price, the difference shall be recovered from the previous auctioneer as arrears of land revenue. However, if the price is higher than the previous price in the re-auction, the previous bidder will not have any right over it.
(4) If any sand/ sand group placed in the auction receives a payment less than the hand price (upset price) or if the payment is not received, the sand/ sand group should be reallocated after recording the detailed reasons.
(b) The Collector shall have the power to reserve for the Maharashtra State Mining Corporation any of the sand blocks which shall not be put up for auction despite the aforesaid proceedings. The Corporation can carry out sand mining either on its own or through agents. The corporation will prepare a depot for the storage and sale of sand extracted from such sandbags and sell the sand at a price pre-decided by the government. From the amount received from the sale of sand, the government will have to ensure the amount of sand ownership fixed by the government from time to time and the remaining amount will remain the income of the corporation. Transport passes will be issued by the concerned collector for the transportation of sand sold by the corporation.
Page 33 of 18.
# Page 19
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(c) The auctioneer shall be required to obtain a trading licence as per the provisions of the Rules if he wants to store and sell sand at a place other than the place of sand mining (at least 1 km away).
Procedure to be followed for disposal of seized sand/ sand stock in illegal quarrying and transportation operations.- (1) With a view to ensure that the seized sand stock is not stolen, the sand is not washed away by rain water, the sand stock is not depleted by erosion, the auction of the seized sand stock should be conducted preferably within one month.
(2) The Sub-Divisional Officer shall auction the seized sand at the hand price fixed for the auction of the sand.
(3) The District Collector shall have the power to grant licences to make available for such Government works the value of sand mentioned in the budget of the Government works concerned in the district or the amount of ownership of sand fixed by the Government from time to time, whichever is higher.
Case No. 7
a) General restrictions and terms/ conditions for sand/ sand mining
(1) The general restrictions and terms/ conditions for sand/ sand mining shall be as follows and shall be mandatory to be incorporated in the agreement to be entered into with the concerned auctioneer/ licensee: (i) It shall be mandatory for the auctioneer/ licensee to erect boundary pillars at the place of sand quarrying approved by him by affixing boards, demarcating the area of quarrying. No sand/ sands can be quarried outside the area. Also, the auctioneer will have to put up a board showing the name, address and place details of the sub-contractor, manager and staff appointed to look after the functioning of the sand pit with the prior permission of the collector.
(ii) The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition (C) No. In 19628-19629/2009. Orders dated 27/02/2012 and further to ensure that the water in the river bed is clean and pure and the water flows naturally into the river bed up to a maximum depth of 3 meters or the water level, whichever is lower, from the sand/ sand group or the environment
Page 19 of 33
# Page 20
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
The auctioneer/ licensee can excavate sand/ sand up to the permitted depth, whichever is less.
(ii) The thickness of the sand layer in the river basin shall be maintained by fixing a bench mark so that sand cannot be mined below the bench mark under any circumstances. The auctioneer will have to ensure that the prescribed bench marks do not fall and the water level in the nearby well does not fall based on the sand level in the river bed.
(iv) The auctioneer shall be entitled to excavate as much sand as is allowed in the auction.
(v) Sand/ sand quarrying can be done only between 6.00 am to 6.00 pm. Excavations carried out during this period will be considered illegal.
(vi) No sand quarrying shall be done within a distance of 600 metres (2000 feet) from any side of any railway bridge and road bridge.
(vii) In the case of Kolhapur type of embankments, the restriction of distance as prescribed by the Irrigation Department/ Divisional Commissioner/ Collector shall be required to be followed.
(viii) Excavation shall be required at a distance of 100 metres from the point of public water supply or as determined by the Ground Water Survey and Development System.
(ix) Sand/ sand cannot be removed from the land used as roads/ footpaths.
The auctioneer will not be able to take large vehicles for transporting sand in the riverbed.
The auctioneer should build a depot on the main road near the sand pit and store the sand extracted from the sand pit in the said depot and sell it. Tractors and trolleys should be used to transport sand to the depot. It is mandatory to install CCTV in the sand depot and its footage should be submitted to the tehsildar every week.
(xi) Commercial or revenue generation is not the sole objective behind the auction or grant of license for sand mining, but the primary objective is to ensure availability of sand required for development work.
Also, sand is mined to prevent flooding in the surrounding areas due to sand accumulation in the river bed. The auctioneer shall be required to start quarrying of sand/ sand within one week from the date of grant of possession of the sand block by the auctioneer/ licensee after the auction is approved or granted licence.
(xii) In addition to this, other terms and conditions mentioned in the accompanying prospectus in respect of sand/ sand mining shall be binding on the bidders.
On page 33 of 20
# Page 21
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(2) In respect of such additional measures as will not impose any financial burden on the Government in order to prevent illegal quarrying more effectively, the District Collectors concerned may include the terms and conditions in the agreement to be entered into with the auctioneers.
b) Tools to be used for sand/ sand mining:
1. The sand from the sandbags fixed in the river basin has to be extracted by manual method.
The District Level Committee shall be responsible for determining the means to be used for sand/ sand mining as per the provisions of the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016 and 2020 and the Sand Mining Framework, 2018, as well as the conditions and conditions contained in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Environmental Clearances of the Central Government, taking into account the available sand reserves and geo-spatial conditions.
Case No. 8
Preventive measures:
In order to prevent illegal sand mining and transportation, the concerned District Collector/ Divisional Commissioner should take the following actions:
1) There should be only one road for sand transportation in each sand pit.
2) The Collector should set up checkpoints at strategic points in sandy areas.
Action should be taken to install weighing boxes by providing funds from the District Planning Committee according to the standard set by the government on such fixed checkpoints.
(a) CCTVs shall be installed by the auctioneer for 24/7 photography at each sand pit location. At least one of these CCTV cameras should be installed in the place where sand is filled in the means of transport and all the vehicles transporting sand in the sand bag should be used for photography in the place from where they go to the village. The price of CCTV installed at the sandbag site will have to be borne by the auctioneers. Also, CCTV cameras should be installed in places where there is a possibility of transportation to prevent illegal transportation of sand from the sand blocks that have not been auctioned and action should be taken to provide funds from the District Planning Committee for this.
(b) The address of the CCTV installed by the auctioneers shall be required to be given to the Collector/ Divisional Commissioner and the Revenue and Forest Department of the Government. Sand mining by auctioneer
Page 33 of 21.
# Page 22
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
It will be mandatory to submit the CD with the photograph of the transport to the Tahsildar's office every 15 days.
(a) The Tahsildar shall get the photographic evidence of the said CD examined by his subordinate machinery. The concerned Tehsildar and Sub Divisional Officer should also check such photographs from time to time. Assuming that the average excavation was done on the day when the camera was closed, the amount per acre should be calculated as per the auction amount and at that rate a penal amount equal to the amount of sand excavated during the period when the CCTV camera was closed should be recovered from the auctioneer. Even if the V is off, the penalty amount as above should be charged and recovered assuming that the CCTV is off for the entire day.
4) Every Village Labourer Talatha shall be required to visit the sand reaches in his area of work regularly. For this, it will be mandatory for the concerned auctioneer to keep the gift certified by the Tahsildar. After the talisman visits the sandbag, it should be recorded in the daily visit book and signed dated.
5) The concerned Circle Officer should also regularly inspect the sand reaches in his area of work, record it in the said daily visit book and sign it dated.
6) The concerned Tahsildar, Sub-Divisional Officer and Additional Collector should make surprise visits to the sand reaches in their area from time to time and record it in the daily gift and sign it dated.
7) The following points should be carefully observed while inspecting the reticula:
(a) the quantity of sand excavated from the commencement of excavation till the date of inspection and the sand stock at the excavation site till the date of inspection.
(b) The excavation in the sand pit should be counted every month in the presence of the concerned Talathi and Gram Sevak as well as the concerned auctioneers.
(c) the extent to which sand is being quarried in the vicinity of the bridge, as well as around the bench mark and below the bench mark, if there is a bridge in the river bed, shall be inspected and recorded.
Page 22 of 33.
# Page 23
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(d) the extent to which excavation is being carried out in the adjoining areas along the river banks and the extent to which mechanical devices such as poclains/ JCBs have been used, shall be inspected and recorded.
(e) A record shall be taken of the extent to which the sand stock excavated has been carried to the prescribed distance.
8) The District Collector shall ensure that the above standards of inspection are strictly followed or how. If it is found that illegal sand mining/ transportation is going on unabated in the jurisdiction of an officer even after inspection, a proposal for disciplinary action against the concerned officer should be submitted to the government through the Divisional Commissioner on the assumption that he is in collusion with the persons involved in illegal mining/ transportation.
Case No. 9
(a) The control
(a) It shall be mandatory to use solar control process for transportation of sand as per the directions issued by the Central Government/ State Government from time to time. Also, the concerned District Collectors will be allowed to use the system to effectively curb illegal sand mining/ transportation without any financial burden to the government in addition to the said control process. Also, the Collector will have the power to use the MRSAC technology as per the requirement of the mining process and the revenue leakage in the mining process of sand/ minor minerals.
(b) To ensure effective control over illegal mining/ transportation of minor minerals, the Additional Collector/ Collector and Divisional Commissioner should form separate teams of police, transport department officials/ employees and revenue officials/ employees at the tehsil, sub-division, district and divisional level. It will be the collective responsibility of these teams to stop illegal mining and transportation in their areas.
(a) The incident or case of illegal mining/ transportation of minor minerals should be thoroughly investigated whether the officers/ employees in whose jurisdiction the incident would come to light are responsible in the matter. If the inspection finds that the concerned local officers/ employees are purposefully neglecting the illegal quarrying or have not exercised adequate control over the illegal quarrying/ transportation, disciplinary action should be taken against those officers/ employees by fixing the responsibility on them as per the prevailing rules.
Page 23 of 33
# Page 24
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
Monthly report on excavation: The Additional Collector/ Collector should submit monthly reports to the Government and the Director, Directorate of Geology and Mining about the total number of sand pits in each district, how many sand pits were auctioned, how many sand pits were not auctioned, how much revenue was received by the Government in this auction, how many brass sand was excavated from each sand pit every month, how many cases of illegal excavation were detected every month in the district and how many cases were filed against the concerned.
3) Village Vigilance Committees- Village Vigilance Committees should be formed in the villages where there are sand deposits. The composition of this committee should be as follows: (1) The Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat, (2) The Gram Sevak Member, (3) The Police Patil Member, (4) The Kotwal Member, (5) The Talathi Member, Secretary of the Grama Sakshata Samiti shall be required to hold a meeting every fifteen days, if there are any recommendations of the Grama Sakshata Samiti to prevent illegal mining of sand/ sand, they should be submitted to the concerned Tahsildar and Collector.
Case No. 10
Funds for the respective Gram Panchayats from the District Mineral Foundation Fund:
Section 9 (b) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 provides for the establishment of District Mineral Foundations in every district affected by mining activities by notification by the State Government. Accordingly, as per the Government Notification, Department of Industry, Energy and Labour No.MDF- 0615/51/ PR No. 34/ Industry-9, dated 01.09.2016, the expenditure for environmental matters should be met from the fund permissible for other measures in line with the enhancement of environmental standards in the mining district.
It has been decided to constitute District Mineral Foundation and take 10% of the amount of ownership money deposited by all types of minor mineral lease holders, licensees and sand auctioneers to the Government as contribution for District Mineral Foundation. The funds will be utilised for the development of roads, health and other infrastructure in the gram panchayat areas.
Page 24 of 33
# Page 25
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
As per the Government Notification, Industries, Energy and Labour Department, No.MDF- 0615/51/ PR No. 34/ Industries-9, dated 01.09.2016, an amount not exceeding five percent of the amount credited to the District Mineral Foundation Fund can be spent for meeting administrative or establishment expenses. Subject to this limit, the said fund may be utilized as per requirement for the following:
(i) To take necessary measures to prevent illegal mining and transportation.
2.Take measures to move the seized vehicle to a safe place if it is in a locked condition.
3. Appointment of security guards for protection of seized sand stock and protection of field officers.
4. Renting of private vehicles for vigilance and inspection team.
To develop innovative projects/ technologies for estimating sand availability, monitoring and controlling sand mining.
Case No. 11
District Level Grievance Redressal Committee on Problems and Grievances in Sand/ Sand Mining
The District Level Sand Control Committee will also look into the problems being faced by the auctioneers for sand mining from the auctioned sand/ sand blocks and environmental complaints being raised by various individuals and organizations regarding sand mining.
(a) Once the highest bid is accepted and finalized, if the auctioneer faces any difficulty/ obstacle in mining sand, he should submit an application to the concerned Tahsildar in this regard. After receiving the application, the concerned tehsildar should investigate the difficulties in excavating from that sand block and submit a report to the said committee. The committee has been asked to submit its report within 15 working days.
(b) If complaints are received from various persons and institutions that sand is mined from sand/ sand sites in violation of the terms/ conditions of the auction, illegal/ illegal sand mining adversely affects the drinking and agricultural water in the villages along the river bank, the transportation of sand causes damage to the agriculture/ roads along the river bank, etc.
On page 33 of 25
# Page 26
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
The tahsildar should conduct an inquiry and submit a report to the committee.
The committee has been asked to submit its report within 15 working days.
(c) If the auctioneer is unable to excavate sand due to local opposition to sand mining or due to natural or external reasons beyond his control, the auctioneer shall immediately apply to the District Level Committee. If such written application is received, the Committee shall visit such sand/ sand sites physically, conduct a fresh survey of the sand/ sand sites, conduct a local inquiry into the other issues in the complaint and after deliberating upon the same in the meeting of the Committee, take an appropriate decision within 15 days regarding the continuation or cessation of sand mining from the concerned sand/ sand blocks and communicate the decision to the concerned auctioneers, complainants and Regional Revenue Officers.
The district level committee should take care of video shooting during the survey of sand.
(d) a complainant who does not accept the decision taken by the Committee in respect of his complaint may appeal to the Divisional Commissioner concerned. The concerned Divisional Commissioner will review the decision taken by the District Level Committee and take an appropriate decision in any case within 15 days. The decision will be communicated to the concerned complainant and the concerned district collector.
(e) In the event of the committee having inquired into the complaint received regarding sand mining as aforesaid and having decided to stop sand mining in the said sand blocks, the agreement entered into with the auctioneer shall be cancelled forthwith. Further, action should be taken as per the provisions of Chapter XII of the said Government Resolution for refund of auction amount or un-excavated sand, as the case may be, to the concerned auctioneers.
(e) If the auctioneer cancels the contract during the period of the contract awarded or prohibits the auctioneer from quarrying sand/ sand, the auctioneer shall not be able to sue the Government.
Page 26 of 33.
# Page 27
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
Case No. 12
(1) Procedure for refund of auction amount: (1) Reasons and rights for refund of auction amount.
(a) In cases where, after successful auction of the sand pit, the auctioneer, after verifying the amount of the auction and other relevant amounts, has not/ is not able to give possession of the sand pit to the concerned auctioneer for some unavoidable reason, the District Level Committee may consider refund of the entire amount of the auction if it is submitted with a report recommending that it is not possible to give possession of the sand pit.
(b) where the auctioneers have confirmed the amount of the auction and other relevant amounts and the sand mining has been suspended by any court order or order of the Government or a superior authority, in such cases the return of the proportionate amount of the auction may be considered in proportion to the period for which the suspension has been granted.
(c) Sand mining has not been/ is not being carried out for any other reason (e.g.
In cases where there is opposition from the villagers, opposition from the administrative agencies), the district level committee should conduct an on-the-spot inspection, verify the reasons given by the auctioneers as well as the villagers and submit the feedback to the collector with a clear recommendation on whether it is possible to excavate sand from the concerned sand pit.
The Collector should examine the reasons given by the district-level committee for not mining sand and give a copy of the documents available to the concerned auctioneers and give them an opportunity to present their side. After that, you need to make a reasonable order.
(2) Consideration of return of proportionate amount of auction:
(a) The cost of sand per tonne or per metric ton as the case may be shall be calculated on the basis of the amount paid for the auction and the estimated sand stock in the auction.
(b) The average quantity of sand to be mined per day shall be determined in accordance with the estimated sand stock at auction and the period available for sand mining.
The quantity of sand which could not be mined during the suspension/ closure period should be determined based on the period for which the auctioneer had to suspend/ stop sand mining and the average quantity of sand to be mined per day.
Page 27 of 33.
# Page 28
Government Resolution No: Gaukhani- 10/1021/ P. No. 82/ KH-1
(a) The amount payable to the auctioneer shall be calculated at the rate of per tonne or per metric tonne as the case may be, for the sand stock identified under (b) above and the un-excavated sand stock, whichever is less.
(3) The amount of the auction shall not be refunded for the following reasons:
As per the terms and conditions of the sand/ sand issue policy as well as the terms and conditions of the tender notice, the bidder is required to ensure before participating in the auction, whether the sandbed has the requisite sand deposits, whether the required roads are available for transportation or not.
Also, it is the responsibility of the auctioneer to excavate the sand with the help of permitted tools. Hence, no refund of auction amount will be admissible on the ground that the sand bed does not have the required sand storage, roads required for transportation are not available, water is present in the sand pit, sand is present in the soil mixture, suction pump for sand mining has not been permitted.
If any of the provisions of this Government Order are inconsistent with any of the Government Orders, Orders, Instructions issued under the Government Memorandum, Government Circular or Government Letter issued earlier in relation to the issue of sand/ sand or in pursuance thereof, action shall be taken in such cases, taking into account the provisions of this Government Order as final.
This Government Resolution is being issued in concurrence with the Informal Reference No.466/ 2021/ Expenditure-9 of the Department of Finance dated 22nd November, 2021.
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33