# Page 1
Approval to buy a new vehicle instead of the unregistered vehicle...
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Revenue and Forestry,
Government Resolution No: Accounts-2022/ P. No.121/ E-6,
Hutatma Rajguru Chowk, Madame Cama Marg, Mantralaya, Mumbai 400 032.
Date: December 8, 2023.
Read:- Government Decision No. Lekha-2022/ P.S. No. 121/ E-6, D. As of November 24, 2023
Read the above Government Resolution in this regard to the Commissioner of Settlement and Director, Land Records (Md. State), Pune, Additional Director of Land Records, Pune for Rs. The State Level Vehicle Review Committee has approved the purchase of 2 cars with a price limit of up to Rs.10 lakh, District Superintendent of Land Records, subject to the availability of funds in the price limit of Rs. 8.00 lakh (price of vehicle+ Goods and Services Tax+ Temporary Registration Charges+ Aids etc. Similarly, for purchase of 4 new vehicles i.e. 3 cars and 1 jeep, a sum of Rs. 36.00 lakh (Rupees Thirty Six Lakh only) (including cost of vehicle+ Goods and Services Tax+ Temporary Registration Charges+ Aids and Appliances etc.), subject to the following conditions:
2. Instead, the Government in the above mentioned decision appointed the Commissioner of Settlement and the Director, Land Records (MDR). State), Rs. The State Level Vehicle Review Committee has approved the purchase of 1 car with a price limit of up to Rs.10 lakh, Additional Director of Land Records, Pune, and District Superintendent of Land Records, Pune, subject to the availability of funds within the price limit of Rs. 8.00 lakh (cost of vehicle+ Goods and Services Tax+ Temporary Registration Charges+ Aids etc.) and the purchase of a new vehicle in lieu of the specified vehicles following the prescribed procedure. Accordingly, a total of 4 new vehicles, 3 cars and 1 jeep, will be purchased and Rs. 34.00 lakhs (Rupees Thirty Four Lakhs only) (including cost of vehicle+ Goods and Services Tax+ Temporary Registration Charges+ Aids, etc.) subject to the following conditions: