# Page 1
A comprehensive policy on sand/ sand extraction, storage and sale through online system by the Government.
Maharashtra
the Revenue and Forest Department
Government Resolution No: Gaukhni- 10/1222/ P.No.82/ Kh-1
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Ministry of Health, Mumbai- 32
Date of release: April 19, 2023
Chapter V of the Maharashtra Minor Mineral Exploration (Development and Regulation) Rules, 2013.
Government Resolution Revenue and Forest Department No: Gauhani- 10/1021/ PR No. 82/ B-1 dated 28th January, 2022
Preamble: Chapter V of the Maharashtra Minor Mineral Exploration (Development and Regulation) Rules, 2013, makes provisions regarding the release of sand/ sand from nullahs, river and creek beds.
Commercial or revenue generation is not the sole objective behind the tendering or licensing of sand mining, but the major objective is to make available the required sand for development work. Also, sand is mined to create flood-like situation in the surrounding areas due to accumulation of sand in the river bed.
Maharashtra has large deposits of sand in its rivers and dams. In the last few years, it has also been observed that during the rainy season, the sand deposits in the river caused flood-like conditions to some extent. Also, the water storage capacity of the dam is decreasing day by day due to silt and sand mixed in the dam. Therefore, informal discussions were held with the Water Resources Department to remove silt and sand from the river and dam. It was also brought to the notice of the Department of Water Resources that as per the notification dated 28/03/2020 of the Department of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, dredging and de-silting of dams, rivers, canals, etc. For this, environmental clearance has been exempted. And this can be done mechanically. However, it did not get the desired response. Similarly, the Mining Corporation, Nagpur has also expressed its inability when asked in this regard.
Similarly, the Department of Mines, Government of India released the Sand Mining Framework-2018 in March, 2018, in which some of the major states of the country were studied and some guidelines were given regarding the necessary aspects while extracting sand/ sand. Also Ma. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) vide O.A. No. 368/2015 dated 19/09/2018 in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, had directed to make suitable changes in the policy as per the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016 and Sand Mining Framework, 2018. Accordingly, a committee headed by the Director, Directorate of Geology and Mining, was constituted to prepare a new sand/ sand release policy in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India and studied the sand policies of some of the major States. According to the The new revised Sand/ Sand Export Policy was issued vide Government Resolution dated 28/01/2022. Sand/ Sand Policy
# Page 2
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
With the aim of making sand available to the citizens of the state at a cheaper price by making it legal and to curb unauthorized mining, the government was considering to formulate a comprehensive policy on sand mining, storage management and sale through online system.
GOVERNMENT DECISIONS: GOVERNMENT DECISIONS, REVENUE AND FOREIGN DEPARTMENT NO.: GAUKHANI- 10/1021/ PR. NO. 82/ KH-1 dated 28/01/2022 issued the revised policy of sand/ sand release and to provide construction sand to the citizens of the state at affordable prices and to prevent unauthorized mining, the government is setting up a committee at the level of the collector to manage the sand/ sand mining, storage and sale through the government on a pilot basis for 1 year as follows.
Case No. 1
. Survey and determination of sand/ sand groups: a). Survey and Determination of Sand/ Sand Clusters in the Bay Area to facilitate Navigation in Maharashtra Coastal Area: 1. Since sand/ sand is required to be mined from time to time to facilitate navigation in the Maharashtra coastal area, the Maharashtra Maritime Board shall determine the sand/ sand clustering on the basis of survey data available till the month of May every year.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board shall take prior approval of the Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority for sand/ sand excavation by mechanical/ dredger method in the Coastal Regulation Zone.
3) For the groups which require the use of mechanical means like dredgers for sand/ sand excavation for drying the shipping lanes, the concerned Collector/ Additional Collector on behalf of the CEO, Maharashtra Maritime Board shall mark as" Reserved Group for sand/ sand excavation by mechanical means" as per the recommendation of the District Level Sand Control Committee.
4) Tenders for sand mining and transportation in the Bay Area falling under the Marine Regulation Zone should be prepared as per the guidelines laid down in the Dredging Guidelines for Major Ports, 2021 issued by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Government of India and the process of excavation should be carried out as per Geophysical and Geotechnical Investigation.
Accredited Environment Consultant will be appointed as per the provisions of the notification dated 14th September, 2006 of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. " The proposal for the funds required for environmental clearance should be submitted by the Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board to the concerned Collector under the District Mineral Foundation," he said.
6) Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board to facilitate the movement of sand/ sand groups, their geographical location, estimated stock of sand/ sand in the area to be mined for drying the shipping channel from the coastal area.
# Page 3
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
After determining the quantity of excavation to be done and the available approach roads, etc., the concerned District Collectors shall be authorized to make arrangements for excavation of sand/ sand from the sand/ sand group identified by the Maharashtra Maritime Board and to keep a check on the system.
7) In order to enable the local people of Maharashtra coastal area to carry out their traditional occupation, the Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board, will take a final decision on behalf of the concerned Collector/ Additional Collector on the recommendation of the District Level Sand Control Committee by marking" Reserved Group for Sand/ Sand Mining by Submerged/ Hand-Slab Method without Permit."
Survey and determination of sand/ sand groups in the river bed: 1) The process of on-site inspection of sand groups in the river bed shall be carried out by the following technical sub-committee: 1. Tehsildar Chairman 2. Deputy Engineer, Water Resources Department Member 3. Junior Geologist Member (nominated by Directorate of Geology Mining)
Junior Geologist Member (nominated by Ground Water Survey and Development Agency)
Member of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board.
(ii) The Technical Sub-Committee shall not determine the sand/ sand groups in areas where sand mining in areas of depletion and continuous scarcity affects the environment and availability of drinking water.
The Technical Sub-Committee shall make recommendations to the Taluk Level Sand Control Committee on whether or not the sand blocks are suitable for excavation after considering the local rainfall and geographical conditions and other environmentally friendly factors, sand formation.
" (1) Taluk Level Sand Monitoring Committee: Taluk level Sand Monitoring Committee will be constituted for each taluk of the district. (This Committee shall hereinafter be referred to as the" Taluk Level Committee." The composition of the Committee shall be as follows: 1. Deputy Divisional Officer Chairperson
2. a member of the police department
3. a member of the Geological
(Nominated by Directorate of Geology and Mining)
Junior Geologist Member
(Nominated by Ground Water Survey and Development Agency)
5. Block Development Officer, Member of Panchayat Samiti
Executive Engineer, Member of the Public Works Department
Executive Engineer, Member of the Water Resources Department
Page 3 of 20
# Page 4
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
8. Representative Member of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board 9. Representative Member of Regional Transport Officer 10. Tehsildar Member Secretary
The Chairman of the Committee may appoint other experts and officers as invited members to advise and guide him on a particular issue.
Powers and Functions of Taluk Level Sand/ Sand Control Committee: 1. Taluk level committee meetings should be held at least once in two months.
(2) The Taluk Level Committee shall identify the sand blocks available for tender in their area and recommend the same to the District Level Committee.
3) The Taluk Level Committee shall determine the estimated quantity of sand to be mined from the identified sand blocks for sand mining. When determining the sand dunes, it will be necessary to present a standardized map with the latitude and longitude of this group.
The Taluk Level Committee will assist the District Level Committee in preparing the District Survey Report in accordance with the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016, Sand Mining Framework, 2018, Enforcement& Monitoring Guidelines for Sand Mining, 2020 and the directions issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time.
5) The removal of sand identified by the Taluk Level Committee will be submitted to the District Level Committee for announcement through online e-tendering.
(6) The Committee shall control and supervise the manner in which sand mining is being carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of the environmental clearance.
The Committee shall make necessary recommendations to the District Level Sand Control Committee for effective implementation of the policy.
The Committee will also recommend the identification of sand deposits available in the area of operation and the alternative sources of sand extraction in the river bed (e.g. sand in soil mix, sand in dam etc.).
(9) The Committee shall determine the categories for the notified areas in accordance with the provisions of the PESA Act, 2011 or as amended from time to time.
10) In addition to the above, the Taluk Level Committee shall discharge the responsibilities assigned to it from time to time by the District Level Sand Control Committee.
The Taluk Level Sanitary Committee shall submit the information mentioned above to the District Sanitary Committee.
(2) District Level Sand Monitoring Committee- A District Sand Monitoring Committee will be constituted in each district to monitor the entire process of sand/ sand extraction. (hereinafter referred to as the" District Committee.") The composition of the committee will be as follows: 1. District Collector, 2. Chief Executive Officer, 3. Superintendent of Police/ Commissioner of Police, 4. Additional Collector, Member
Page 4 of 20
# Page 5
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
Superintending Engineer, Public Works Department 6. Executive Engineer, Water Resources Department 7. Deputy Conservator of Forests 8. Regional Transport Officer 9. Regional Officer, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board 10. Senior Geologist, Ground Water Survey System 11. Representative of Maharashtra Maritime Board (for creek area) 12. District Mining Officer Member Secretary
The Chairman of the Committee may appoint other experts and officers as invited members for advice and guidance on a particular issue.
Powers and Functions of the District Level Committee: (1) The Committee shall meet at least once in three months.
2) The committee for proper solar control can do the digitization of sandbags in the district through the Maharashtra Remote Sensing System or an approved agent as per the requirement.
(3) After considering the proposals received from the Taluk Level Committees and making necessary changes, if required, the District Level Committees shall take action as follows: i) identify sand blocks for providing sand storage in the sand depots.
(ii) Sand blocks shall be reserved for grant of licence to local persons and local bodies for extraction of sand by traditional methods like hand tilling/ sinking.
4) Provide recommendation for environmental clearance of sand dunes for the purposes mentioned above.
5) All the procedures related to sandbagging and excavation. It shall ensure compliance with the directions issued by the National Green Tribunal from time to time as well as the provisions contained in the notification issued from time to time by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India.
The committee will have the power to appoint an approved consultant for environmental clearance and other related works and for preparing the District Survey Report.
The Committee shall take appropriate decisions on sand/ sand mining/ development and transportation, as may be required.
The Committee shall issue necessary instructions to the officers of the Government/ Semi-Government and local bodies in the district for the effective implementation of this decision.
9) Subject to the provisions, terms and conditions prescribed in accordance with this policy, the committee shall recommend to the District Collector for approval of tenders for sand mining and transportation to sand depots, construction and management of depots.
10) The Water Resources Department may authorize the Collector to remove silt/ silt mixed sand from such places if the Water Resources Department determines certain groups/ sites in the river basin for such matters as reducing the risk of flood situation in the state, restoring/ streamlining the river flow.
Similarly, the Maharashtra Maritime Board can also authorize the Collector for the creek bed or if the Board excavates to maintain the flow in the creek, the sand can be sold to the citizens as above.
Page 5 of 20
# Page 6
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
(iii) Recommendation of the Gram Sabha- After determining the sand blocks in the river basin, it will be mandatory to take the recommendation of the Gram Sabha for the tender of sand extraction and transportation from the said sand blocks. After receiving the reference from the Gram Panchayat, it will be mandatory for the Gram Panchayat to convene the Gram Sabha and take a decision on it within 1 month. If the Gram Sabha gives a negative resolution, the Gram Sabha should be held within the next 10 days under the chairmanship of the Sub-Divisional Officer (Revenue) and on the basis of their recommendations, a report will be submitted to the District Level Sand Control Committee immediately to extract sand from the sandbag as per the quality and to tender for transporting it to the depot.
(v) Provision of sand for major projects of Central/ State Government: The District Collectors concerned should maintain suitable sand blocks/ ghats in their districts to ensure availability of sand for major projects of Central/ State Government. If the department concerned demands, the group/ ghat should be made available to that department as per the rules.
v] Under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana and for the households of the beneficiaries belonging to the economically backward classes, the list submitted by the competent authority will be made available free of cost from the sand depot after the concerned Tehsildar checks it and gives written permission. Cost of transportation will be borne by the beneficiary.
Case No. 2
. The District Collectors will prepare a time-bound mining plan for sand blocks as per the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016, Sand Mining Framework, 2018, Enforcement& Monitoring Guidelines for Sand Mining, 2020 and the directions issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time.
" Environmental Clearance- (a) Environmental Clearance for sand/ sand mining in sand beds in the Bay of Bengal. The Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition (C) No. In 19628-19629/2009. As per the order dated 27/02/2012 and Hon. The National Green Tribunal, Western Division, Bench, Pune, vide Application No. 34 (THC)/ 2013 (WZ) dated 29.05.2014, it shall be necessary to take action for obtaining environmental clearance by the Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board, as per the provisions of the notification (EIA Notification-2006) dated 14th September, 2006 of the Department of Environment and Forests, Government of India, before sand/ sand mining. Environmental clearance should be obtained for 3 years with the consent of the Department of Environment.
Environmental clearance is not required for grant of sand/ sand mining licences to local persons and entities engaged in traditional occupations within the" Bay Area Sand Group Hand Level Sand/ Sand Mining Reserved Group" under the" Vinalilaw Licensing System." In this regard, the concerned District Collector should take action as per the provisions of the notification issued by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change dated 24/11/2022.
Environmental clearance for sand/ sand mining in river basin- 1. The Supreme Court, The High Court, Ma. The directions issued by the National Green Tribunal from time to time as well as by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India from time to time.
# Page 7
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
As per the provisions of the notification issued, action is required to be taken regarding environmental clearances and ancillary matters. Sand cannot be mined without obtaining environmental clearance.
(2) Prior to sand mining from sand/ sand blocks, the proposals of sand blocks in the district should be submitted in the form prescribed by the District Mining Officer as the project promoter to the Expert Appraisal Committee and the Environment Impact Assessment Authority for approval of the committees under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, as per the notification issued from time to time. Environmental clearance should be obtained for 3 years with the consent of the Department of Environment.
Accredited Environment Consultant will be appointed as per requirement for environmental clearance. The expenditure for this will be met from the grant available for the environment from the District Mineral Foundation Fund.
4) The District Mining Officer along with the Accredited Environment Consultant will be present in every meeting where the proposal will be put up for consideration.
(5) Environmental clearance shall be obtained by designation of the officers who submit proposals for environmental clearance to the Environment Committee as the case may be.
6) Before sand mining from sand/ sand blocks, the process of obtaining approval of the Expert Appraisal Committee and the Environment Impact Assessment Authority, which are in the field at that time, as per the notification of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, from time to time, should be done after sand block determination.
Case No. 3
. Required Qualification for tender holders: (a) Required qualification for tenderers for transportation and depot management of sand from sand quarries to the excavated sand depot 1) Any person or company/ institution shall be ineligible to participate in the tender process for the following reasons:
(a) a person who is aged, or who is aged, or
(b) A person holding an office of profit in the Central or State Government. Before this, the list of persons/ organizations who have been made to pay the arrears of ownership of minor minerals or the dead rent should be prepared and published from time to time by the Collector's Office for this purpose.
(d) a person/ institution who has been convicted by a court of law for committing moral turpitude or illegal extraction or transportation of a minor mineral. If the turnover in the previous financial year is less than the prescribed limit
Page 7 of 20
# Page 8
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
Individuals/ entities participating in the tender process will be required to have proof of regular income tax payment for the last 3 years, PAN number, GSTIN number of the Goods and Services Tax Department.
3) The tender application fee for individuals/ organizations desirous of filling tenders for transportation of sand from the sand pits and excavated sand to the sand depots, construction and management of depots will be Rs. 5,000/- to be paid online in the name of the District Collector of the concerned district or in such manner as the Collector may notify.
4) The person/ organization participating in the tender process will be paid a sum of Rs.
Rs 5.00 lakh.
" Authority for tendering of sand quarrying, transportation and storage of sand from sand blocks: (1) The tender process for transportation of sand from all sand blocks in the district and transportation of excavated sand to the depot, construction and management of the depot should be carried out under the control of the Collector at the district level.
(2) If a sandbag falls jointly between two districts of a revenue division, the two Collectors shall, after joint inspection and consultation, determine it as a joint sandbag and submit a report in this regard to the Divisional Commissioner. Thereafter, the Divisional Commissioner shall direct one of the two District Collectors to take action in respect of such joint sand quarries, the District Collector shall conduct the tender process for excavation of sand from the joint sand quarries, transportation of sand to the depots, construction and management of sand depots.
(3) If a sandbag falls jointly between two districts of two revenue divisions, in such cases also, both the Collectors shall, after joint inspection and consultation, submit a report to both the Divisional Commissioners concerned. The Divisional Commissioner shall, in consultation with one of the two District Collectors, direct that the tender process for sand extraction and transportation of excavated sand from the said combined sand blocks to the sand depot, construction and management of the sand depot shall be completed by the District Collector. If the two divisional commissioners do not agree on the tender process for such a joint sand quarry, a self-explanatory proposal should be submitted to the government for decision. The decision of the Government in this regard shall be final.
(iii) Procedure for sand/ sand quarrying, transportation, construction and management of depots: The tender process should be carried out for transportation, construction and management of depots for sand quarried and excavated from sandbags to constructionable sand depots.
(2) The period of excavation of sand blocks shall be determined by the Collector taking into account the orders issued from time to time by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India. Also, the area of the sand pit should be fixed up to 5 hectares or as per the sand stock available for excavation in the said group.
The process of determination of sand blocks, the process of sand mining in the group shall be as follows: (a) As per the annual plan for that year in the mining plan, the boundaries of the sand blocks to be excavated from that year should be determined on the map of the respective sand blocks and at the actual area level and thus the excavation to be done during the tender period should be planned.
Page 8 of 20
# Page 9
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
b) It shall be ensured that no excavation takes place again in the area where excavation has been completed as per the mining plan.
Case No. 4
General guidelines for the tender process
1) Tendering process should be carried out for the transportation of sand from river/ creek bed sand blocks to the construction and excavated construction sand depot, construction and management of sand depot.
The advertisement of the tender should be published in two major newspapers of the district at least 15 days before the tender. Its copies should be pasted on the notice board in the office of all the Regional Revenue Officers. Advertisement should also be published on the government website.
(3) If any complaints/ objections/ suggestions are received regarding the proposed tender, the District Collector/ Additional Collector and the Divisional Commissioner in the case of Joint Sand Tenders shall examine/ inquire into the same and take appropriate decision regarding the process of tender of the respective sand tenders in accordance with the inquiry.
4) The tender process of all sand blocks in the district should be carried out under the personal control and supervision of the concerned Collector or Additional Collector. The Collector or Additional Collector cannot assign this work to any other officer under any circumstances.
(5) In the case of composite sand mining, the tendering process shall be carried out under the personal control and supervision of the concerned Divisional Commissioner. The Divisional Commissioner cannot assign this work to any other officer under any circumstances.
6) If less than 3 tenders are received, the re-tendering process should be adopted. In case of non-receipt of 3 or more tenders, the Collector/ Divisional Commissioner, as the case may be, shall be empowered to take a decision as to whether or not to accept the bids received.
(7) The date and time of the opening of the tender shall be published.
8) The lowest bidder will be considered as the successful bidder.
9) The successful bidder should be given a letter of intent (LOI) from the Collector's office within 2 days.
10) The government will enter into an agreement with the tender holder. Only after this, permission will be given to excavate sand from the sand pit and bring sand to the sand depot and store it.
11) The person participating in the tender process, whose bid/ tender has not been accepted, will have to pay the reserve amount (EMD) paid for participating in the tender process. 5.00 lakh should be returned immediately after the tender process is over. The successful bidder shall be paid a sum of Rs. 5.00 lakhs to be adjusted as security deposit.
Decision to accept or reject the lowest bid in the tender will be taken by the Additional Collector/ Collector or Divisional Commissioner, as the case may be.
Page 9 of 20
# Page 10
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
The decision has to be informed to the concerned. If the decision to reject the tender is taken, the detailed reasons should be recorded.
13) The agreement to be entered into with the successful tenderer in respect of the tender for the extraction of sand/ sand from the sand pit, transportation of sand to the depot, construction and management of the depot should be registered. The agreement should be executed within 15 days of the issuance of the Letter of Intent (LOI).
14) After signing the contract, the tenderer should be given actual possession of the sand site. Excavation must be started within 30 days after possession.
15) It will be mandatory for the tenderers concerned to use the mahakhanij system or such system as the government directs, to excavate sand from the sand pit, transport sand to the depot, build the depot and manage the depot.
16) The tenderer who is engaged in the transportation, construction and management of sand quarries from the sand group will be paid 90% of the sand sale amount at the end of each month after submitting the payment in the prescribed format. The remaining amount should be paid to the bidder after the expiry of the tender period.
17) The Divisional Commissioner/ Collector shall be at liberty to include such terms and conditions as he may deem necessary.
Case No. 5
Terms and Conditions
. ] a) Terms and Conditions regarding sand extraction from sand blocks, transportation of sand to the depot after excavation: 1) All sand blocks are to be removed from the site. The Supreme Court, The High Court, Ma. The directions issued by the National Green Tribunal from time to time as well as the notification issued from time to time by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India, shall be prescribed as per the provisions of the Act.
The maximum period of the tender shall be up to 3 years (which shall be as per the time period prescribed in the environmental clearance) or till the end of the sand stock in the said sand block, whichever is earlier. The District Collector will be responsible for obtaining environmental clearance. The Collector should ensure that the renovation work is completed within the stipulated time before the expiry of environmental clearance.
The monsoon season will be from June 10 to September 30 and sand mining will not be allowed during this period. The tenderer should be made aware of this.
4) When determining the duration of excavation, the following factors should be considered: a. Annual rate of sand replenishment.
(b) Ground Water Survey Development System and Feasibility Report of Irrigation Department on availability of sand.
(c) the local and geographical conditions specified in the environmental permit and the mining plan.
Guidelines on Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016, Sand Mining Framework, 2018 and Enforcement& Monitoring Guidelines for Sand Mining, 2020 and guidelines issued by the Central and State Governments from time to time.
Page 10 of 20
# Page 11
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
5) In the tender advertisement for sand/ sand group, the period of excavation, survey number of sand/ sand group, sand/ sand group number, name of sand/ sand group, estimated sand/ sand stock in sand/ sand group should be mentioned.
It will be mandatory to transport sand from the sand pit to the sand depot by" tractor" or a vehicle with a maximum of 6 tires (tipper). If there is a problem in this regard, the Collector should submit a proposal to the government.
7) GPS system will be mandatory for vehicles transporting sand from the sand pit to the sand depot.
8) The number of tractors and 6-tier tippers transporting sand from the sand pit to the sand depot should be registered and their numbers should be taken. If sand is found to be transported by other vehicles other than these vehicles, penal action will be taken against the concerned tenderers/ contractors by considering such sand transportation as illegal.
9) The entire visible part of the trolley and 6 tyre tipper of the vehicles transporting sand from the sand pit to the sand depot should be yellow. If the sand is transported to other places except the sand depot, the vehicle will be seized and penal action will be taken against the tender holder, driver and goods as per the rules. The tenderer should ensure that no vehicle other than the vehicle registered for transporting sand at the sand group/ ghat falls within the area of the geo-fence.
10) If the tenderer is unable to excavate sand, action should be taken to cancel the tender by confiscating the reserve amount/ security deposit.
11) The entire geo-fence of the sand land identified for excavation will be mandatory.
12) Installation of CCTVs in sand blocks in river/ creek bed shall be mandatory.
" Terms and Conditions regarding Depot Creation and Management 1) Sand from the sand depot will be sold through the online system of the Maha Khanij or the government will determine.
2) Government land can be used for construction of sand depots, if available. In case of non-availability of government land, the private land on which the road is available should be taken on lease basis initially for a period of up to 3 years, after which it can be renovated for the required period.
(3) The amount of tenancy shall be admissible to the extent of Rs.30,000/- per acre per annum for private land.
4) It will be mandatory to fence the sand depot of sand storage with barbed wire.
5) CCTVs should be installed in each sand depot for 24/7 photography. CCTVs should be installed at the place of weighbridge and at the place where the sand depot will be inspected.
6) There should be a control room, security system in the sand depot.
7) The tenderer will be responsible for the supply of electricity to the sand depot.
8) In case of interruption of power supply at the sand depot due to some unavoidable reason, it shall be the responsibility of the tender holder to install generators of the required capacity so that the operations at the depot are not affected.
9) It will be mandatory to install electronic digital weighbridge at the place of sand depot.
Page 11 of 20
# Page 12
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
10) It will be necessary to create a system where the concerned tender holders, concerned customers and government agencies will be alerted through SMS system before the sand/ sand is dumped in the sand depot and before the sand is distributed to the customers from the sand depot.
11) It will be necessary to create a computerized system for the sale of sand from the sand depot, the stock register, the incoming (sales) register will be computerized.
12) The sale of sand should be done on the basis of metric tons.
13) It will be mandatory to register the balance sand stock and the amount of sand sold at the sand depot site on the Maha Khanij system online on a daily basis.
5% up to$ 5000
5001- 10,000 up to 4%
Stocks upto 10,001-20, 000 03%
More than 20,001%
II] General Restrictions and Terms/ Conditions: The general restrictions and terms/ conditions for sand/ sand mining shall be as follows and shall be mandatorily incorporated in the agreement to be entered into with the tenderer/ licensee concerned: 1) It shall be mandatory for the tenderer/ licensee to erect boundary pillars at the place of sand quarrying approved by him by affixing boards, demarcating the area of quarrying. No sand/ sands can be quarried outside the area. Also, the tenderer will have to put up a board showing the name, address and place details of the manager and staff appointed to look after the functioning of the sand pit with the prior permission of the Collector.
2) The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition (C) No. Order dated 27/02/2012 in 19628-19629/2009 and for the purpose of keeping the water in the river basin clean and pure and for the natural flow of water in the river basin, the sand/ sand can be mined by the tenderer/ licensee only up to a maximum depth of 3 meters from the sand/ sand group or the water level, whichever is lower or the depth permitted in the environmental clearance, whichever is lower.
3) In order to maintain the thickness of the sand layer in the river basin, sand can not be mined under any circumstances below the bench mark by setting the bench mark, the fixed bench mark will not fall, and the water level in the surrounding well will not decrease based on the sand layer in the river basin. The tenderer must take due care in this regard.
4) The tenderer will be entitled to excavate as much sand as is allowed in the tender.
5) Sand/ sand quarrying can be done only between 6.00 am to 6.00 pm. Excavations beyond this period will be considered illegal.
Sand mining shall not be permitted within a distance of 600 metres (2000 feet) from any side of any railway bridge or road bridge.
Page 12 of 20
# Page 13
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
7) In the case of Kolhapur system of embankments, the restriction of distance fixed by the Irrigation Department/ Divisional Commissioner/ Collector will be required to be followed.
8) Excavation will be required at a distance of 100 metres from the place of public water supply or as determined by the Ground Water Survey and Development System.
9) Sand/ sand cannot be removed from the land used as roads/ footpaths.
10) The transportation of sand from the river bed to the depot should be done by tractor or maximum 6 tires (tipper).
11) The tenderer should build the depot on the side of the main road near the sand pit.
The tenderer shall take all precautions to ensure that there is no threat to the natural wealth and environment while quarrying sand/ sand from the area allotted to the tenderer for quarrying sand/ sand from the river bed/ drain.
13) The tenderer should not disturb the disposal rights of the villagers.
The tenderer is required to maintain a daily record of sand/ sand excavated and stored in the depot. These registers and other accounting documents should be made available to the District Mining Officer, the Mining Officer, the Revenue Officer as well as the Collector and the inspecting officers of the Directorate of Geology and Mining.
15) The customer's Aadhaar number will be mandatory for the sale of sand from the sand depot.
16) A maximum of 50 metric tonnes of sand/ sand will be permissible at a time for a family. After this, if you want sand, you can ask for sand after 1 month from the date of receiving sand.
17) Customers who want sand will be required to register their sand purchase demand on the MahaKhanij system. Customers who are not able to do this can register their demand through the Setu Center. The collector should fix the processing fee of the Setu Seva Kendra.
18) It will be mandatory for the customer to carry sand from the sand depot within 15 days of registering the demand for sand. If the sand is not lifted within the stipulated time due to some unavoidable reasons, the concerned Tahsildar can extend the time.
19) The District Collector in consultation with the Transport Department should fix the rate of transportation per kilometer according to the type of vehicle and make the information available on their website as well as on the mahakhanij system for the information of the citizens. Also, these rates should publish the information of the transporters who transport sand.
20) It is mandatory to transport sand by covering the sand in the vehicle with plastic paper/ tarpaulin. If this is not done, legal proceedings will be taken.
21) The tenderer will be required to excavate sand from river/ creek bed and store the construction sand in the sand pit.
22) The tenderer shall transport the quantity of sand equivalent to his carrying capacity to the sand/ sand carrying vehicle at the place of his tender. If sand/ sand is found to be carried in excess of the carrying capacity, the entire sand in the vehicle should be considered as illegal and penal action should be taken as per the rules as well as the Motor Vehicle Act regarding the transportation of sand in excess of the carrying capacity.
Page 13 of 20
# Page 14
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
23) In case of an accident during the excavation or transportation of sand, the tender holder should immediately report the accident to the nearest police station.
If any major mineral is found during the excavation of sand/ sand, the tenderer/ contractor should inform the Divisional Commissioner/ Collector/ Additional Collector within seven days.
The tenderer shall not transfer the tender/ contract to any other person without prior approval of the Government or allow any other person to operate or take any partner after the tender.
26) The tenderer is required to submit a statement to the Collector on the 10th of every month as to how much excavation has been done from the sand ghat sanctioned to them. The Additional Collector/ Collector shall have the power to cancel the sand tenders and take penal action against the tenderers who do not submit the monthly returns within the stipulated time.
27) Action should be taken as per Rule 48 (7) and (8) of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Act, 1966 after catching illegal sand/ sand deposits.
28) The tenderer should inform the Tahsildar/ Collector about the vehicles used for transporting sand. Care should be taken to ensure that the traffic does not exceed the carrying capacity of the vehicle under any circumstances.
It shall be mandatory to give yellow colour to tractors (trolleys) or vehicles carrying sand/ sand from river/ creek bed to the depot. Such loss/ damage shall be assessed by the competent authority and their decision thereon shall be final and such amount shall be recovered from the tenderer concerned as per recovery of dues of land revenue.
Action to be taken if the tenderer violates the terms/ conditions: 1) If the tenderers collude with each other, no tenderer comes forward even after re-tendering of certain sand ghats and hence the tender of sand ghats cannot be held, thus the tenderer who colludes and causes loss of revenue to the government as well as committing crimes like illegal quarrying and transportation will be blacklisted for the entire state.
2) If it is found that the depth of excavation is more than the permitted depth in the environmental clearance, the reserve amount taken from the tenderer should be confiscated and the tender should be cancelled. Such excavations should be declared illegal and action should be taken under the provisions of Section 48 (7) and (8) of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966.
3) It should be verified whether the driver transporting sand/ sand from the sand depot to the customer has a valid ETP transport pass or not. If the driver of the vehicle is not found to be in possession of a valid ETP or a traffic pass with a barcode, action should be taken against the concerned as per Section 48 (7) and (8) of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966.
Page 14 of 20
# Page 15
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
4) If the concerned tenderer is found guilty in the case of illegal excavation and transportation, action should be taken against them as per the prevailing rules.
While taking action as per the prevailing rules, action should be taken against the concerned under sections 34,114,379, 392,393,394, 396, etc. of the Indian Penal Code, penal action under the provisions of section 48 (7) of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966, and under the provisions of section 48 (8), seizing machinery used for sand mining and vehicles used for transportation, seizing illegally mined sand, etc.
5) Also, if it is found that revenue officials/ employees are being attacked while taking action in connection with illegal mining/ transportation of sand, or if organized crime is found in such places, action should be taken against such organized crime under the Maharashtra Prevention of Disruptive Activities of Slum Dens, Handloom Workers, Drug Abusers, Dangerous Persons Act, 1981.
The tenderer/ licensee shall be bound to comply with the terms and conditions of the environmental clearance as well as the provisions of the environmental regulations. Any violation of this provision shall be punishable under the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
Case No. 6
tender
. Provision of Government or Private Land for Sand Depot: To determine the cost of transporting sand/ sand from river/ creek bed to the sand depot, the Collector should take action to identify the government or private land for sand depot before floating the tender. After that, the tender process will begin.
No rent will be charged for the government land made available for the construction of sand depots. However, in case of non-availability of government land, the tenancy amount will be admissible for private land to the extent of Rs.30,000/- per acre per annum. Necessary funds will be allocated for this.
" Tendering Process: A single tender should be floated at the rate of Rs. per metric tonne, taking into account the cost of excavation of sand from the sand block, transportation of sand to the depot after excavation, construction and management of the depot. This will include the following expenses: 1. Excavation of sand in river/ creek bed, transportation of construction sand to depot, transportation cost including unloading of sand.
3. Depot Construction and Depot Management Costs (including fencing of wires, installation of CCTVs on all sides of the depot, power supply (including Ad-provision Illumination), all facilities including internet, control room, staff, filling machinery etc.) 4. Electronic Weights May be reduced. Electronic Weighbridge with Digital Display (EWBD) of 50 Tonne capacity to be installed.
6. The Collector shall determine the staff as per the size of the sand depot.
Page 15 of 20
# Page 16
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
The cost for the implementation of the Environment Management Plan will be borne by the tender holders.
8. The cost of hydrographic survey fee for the sand group in the basin shall be borne by the tenderer.
(iii) Sale price of sand/ sand: 1) On a pilot basis, the sale price of sand should be fixed at Rs.600/- per birch (Rs.133/- per metric tonne) for the entire State for one year and the amount of ownership tax should be waived. Apart from this, the citizens will bear the cost of transporting sand.
(2) In addition, the expenses of the District Mineral Foundation Fund and Transport License Service Fee, etc. levied by the Government shall be mandatory.
IV. Formation of Depots for Minor Sand Groups: If it is not economical or feasible to construct separate depots for each minor sand group in a district or taluk, the Collector may construct a single depot for such group of sand groups. And in such a place, it should be clearly mentioned in the tender to which tenderer the work of depot management will be entrusted.
(v) The Government shall provide for the cost of excavation of sand from the sand blocks in the river/ creek bed, transportation to the sand depots, construction and maintenance of the depots as well as the tenancy charges for the private land for the sand depots.
The Water Resources Department may authorize the Collector to remove silt, silt mixed sand from such places if the Water Resources Department determines certain groups/ sites in the river basin for such matters as reducing the risk of flood situation in the State, restoring/ streamlining the flow of the river. Similarly, the Maharashtra Maritime Board can also authorize the Collector for the creek bed or if the Board excavates to maintain the flow in the creek, the sand can be sold to the citizens as above.
Case No. 7
Preventive Measures: In order to prevent illegal mining and transportation of sand, the concerned Divisional Commissioner/ Collector should take action as follows: 1.
2) Installation of CCTV cameras in the sand group. CCTVs should be installed by the tender holder for 24/7 photography at each sandbagging location. At least one of these CCTV cameras should be installed at the place where the sand is filled and all the vehicles transporting sand in the sand pit should be used for photography at the place from where the sand reaches the village. The cost of CCTV installed at the sandbag site will have to be borne by the tenderers. Also, CCTV cameras should be installed at the places where sand is likely to be transported to prevent illegal transportation of sand from the non-tendered sandbags.
Page 16 of 20
# Page 17
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
Funds should be provided by the District Planning Committee.
The address of the CCTV installed by the tenderers will be required to be given to the Collector/ Divisional Commissioner and the Revenue and Forest Department of the Government. It will be mandatory for the tenderer to submit a CD containing photographs of sand mining and transportation to the Tahsildar's office every 15 days.
(c) The Tahsildars shall get the photographic evidence of the said CD examined by their subordinate machinery.
The concerned Tehsildar and Sub Divisional Officer should also check such photographs from time to time.
(3) Every Village Labourer shall be required to visit the sand reaches/ sand depots in his area of work regularly. For this, it will be mandatory for the concerned tenderer to keep the gift certified by the Tahsildar. After visiting the Sand Guts/ Sand Depots, the Talatha should enter it in the daily visit book and sign it with a date.
4) The concerned Circle Officer should also regularly inspect the sand pit/ sand depot in his area of jurisdiction and record the same in the said daily visit book and sign it dated.
5) The concerned Tehsildar, Sub-Divisional Officer and Additional Collector should make surprise visits to the sand reaches/ sand depots in their area from time to time and record it in the daily gift and sign it dated.
6) The following points should be carefully observed while inspecting the reticula: a. The quantity of sand excavated from the start of excavation till the date of inspection and the sand stock at the excavation site till the date of inspection.
(b) It shall be checked whether sand is being mined in the vicinity of the bridge, as well as around the bench mark and below the bench mark, if there is a bridge in the river bed and a record of the same shall be taken on record.
(c) quarrying shall be carried out in the contiguous area of the river bank in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in the mining plan prepared for quarrying and the environmental clearance obtained accordingly.
7) The District Collector shall ensure that the above standards of testing are strictly followed or how. If it is found that illegal sand mining/ transportation is going on unabated in the jurisdiction of an officer even after inspection, a proposal for disciplinary action against the concerned officer should be submitted to the government through the Divisional Commissioner on the assumption that he is in collusion with the persons involved in illegal mining/ transportation.
Case No. 8
(a) It shall be mandatory to use solar control process for transportation of sand as per the directions issued by the Central Government/ State Government from time to time. It will also be mandatory to use the computer system of Maha Khanij along with the said solar control system to effectively curb illegal mining/ transportation of sand.
Page 17 of 20
# Page 18
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
(b) To ensure effective control over illegal mining/ transportation of minor minerals, the Additional Collector/ Collector and Divisional Commissioner should form separate teams of police, transport department officials/ staff and revenue officials/ staff at the tehsil, sub-division, district and divisional level. It will be the collective responsibility of these teams to stop illegal mining and transportation in their areas.
(c) The incident or case of illegal mining/ transportation of minor minerals should be thoroughly investigated whether the officers/ employees in whose jurisdiction the incident would come to light are responsible in the matter. If the inspection finds that the concerned local officers/ employees are purposefully neglecting the illegal quarrying or have not exercised adequate control over the illegal quarrying/ transportation, disciplinary action as per the prevailing rules should be taken against those officers/ employees by fixing the responsibility on them.
2) Monthly report of excavation and sale of sand pits, how many sand pits have been tendered in each district, how many sand pits have not been tendered, how many metric tons of sand has been excavated from these sand pits every month and how many cases of illegal excavation and sale of sand in the depot, how many cases of illegal excavation have been detected every month and how many cases have been filed against the concerned, the Additional Collector/ Collector should submit monthly statement to the government and the Director, Geology and Mining.
Case No. 9
Instructions regarding work to be done from the District Mineral Foundation Fund: The Central Government in Section 9 (b) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 has provided for the establishment of District Mineral Foundation in every district affected by mining activities by notification by the State Government. Accordingly, as per the Government Notification, Department of Industry, Energy and Labour No.MDF 0615/51/ PR No. 34/ Industry-9, dated 01.09.2016, the expenditure for environmental matters should be met from the fund permissible for other measures in line with the enhancement of environmental standards in the mining district.
It has been decided to constitute District Mineral Foundation and take 10% of the amount of ownership money deposited by all types of minor mineral lease holders, licensees and sand tenderers to the Government as contribution for District Mineral Foundation. From this fund, funds for roads, health, etc. in the Gram Panchayat area are paid as per the guidelines.
As per the Government Notification, Industries, Energy and Labour Department, No.MDF MDF 0615/51/ PR No. 34/ Udyog-9, dated 01.09.2016, an amount not exceeding 5% of the amount credited to District Mineral Foundation Fund can be spent for meeting administrative or establishment expenses. Subject to this limitation, the said fund may be used for the following purposes as may be necessary: 1) To take necessary measures to prevent illegal mining and transportation.
Page 18 of 20
# Page 19
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
2) If the seized vehicle is in a locked condition, take measures to move the seized vehicle to a safe place.
3) Appointment of security guards to protect the seized sand deposits and to protect the field officers.
4) Hiring of private vehicles for vigilance and inspection team.
Develop innovative projects/ technologies for estimating sand availability, monitoring and controlling sand mining.
Case No. 10
The District Level Grievance Redressal Committee will look into the problems and grievances of sand/ sand mining, the difficulties faced by the tenderer for sand mining from the tendered sand/ sand blocks and the environmental complaints raised by various individuals and organizations.
1) If any complaint is received from various individuals and organizations that sand is being mined from sand/ sand sites in violation of the terms and conditions of the tender, illegal/ illegal sand mining adversely affects the drinking and agricultural water in the villages along the river bank, sand transportation harms the agriculture/ roads along the river bank, such complaint should be investigated by the Tehsildar and a report should be submitted to the District Level Committee. The committee has been asked to submit its report within 15 working days.
(2) If the tenderer faces any difficulty/ hindrance in excavating sand or if the tenderer is unable to excavate sand due to local opposition to sand excavation or due to reasons beyond his control and natural resources, the tenderer shall immediately apply to the District Level Committee. If such a written application is received, the Committee shall visit such sand/ sand sites physically, conduct a fresh survey of the sand/ sand sites, make a local inquiry into the other issues in the complaint and after deliberating upon the same in the Committee meeting, take an appropriate decision within 15 days regarding the continuation or discontinuation of sand mining from the concerned sand/ sand blocks and communicate the decision to the concerned tenderers, complainants and Regional Revenue Officers. The district level committee should take care of video shooting during the survey of sand.
(3) A complainant who does not accept the decision taken by the Committee in respect of his complaint may appeal to the concerned Divisional Commissioner. The concerned Divisional Commissioner will review the decision taken by the District Level Committee and take an appropriate decision in any case within 15 days. The decision will be communicated to the concerned complainant and the concerned district collector.
(4) In the event of the committee having inquired into the complaint received regarding sand mining as aforesaid and having decided to stop sand mining in the said sand blocks, the agreement entered into with the tenderer shall be cancelled forthwith.
If any of the provisions of this Government Order are inconsistent with any of the Government Orders, Orders, Instructions issued under the Government Memorandum, Government Circular or Government Letter issued earlier in relation to the issue of sand/ sand or in pursuance thereof, action shall be taken in such cases, taking into account the provisions of this Government Order as final.
Page 19 of 20
# Page 20
Government Resolution No. Gauhani- 10/1222/ No. 82/ Kh-1
The Government/ Department shall have the power to issue necessary guidelines for the implementation of the policy in accordance with this policy.
This Government Resolution is being issued in concurrence with the Informal Reference No. 81/2023/ Expenditure-9 dated 02.03.2023 of the Department of Finance.