# Page 1
Compassionate policy applicable to Kotwal employees
about doing it.
Government of Maharashtra
Revenue and Forest Department,
Government Decision No. Narrow-2024 / P.No.292 / E-10
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400032.
Date: 7th October, 2024
Reference: Ma. The Cabinet of Ministers. Meeting on 30.9.2024
Preface: - The Kotwals of the state Ma. The Chief Minister, Shri. The Deputy Chief Minister, Shri. The Minister and Shri. made to the representatives of the people.
Among the various demands is the demand for a compassionate policy for the Kotwals. Fourth Class for Kotwals
With regard to the application of the category and other demands. The Chief Minister presided over the function on Wednesday. The State level headed by Additional Chief Secretary (Finance) as directed in the meeting held on 3.7.2024
Committee of Secretaries on Thursday. The meeting was held on 29.8.2024. At the meeting, the committee
According to the recommendations made and m. The Cabinet gave. According to the decision taken at the meeting on 30.9.2024
The implementation of a compassionate policy for the Kotwals in the state was under the consideration of the government.
Government Decision: - Government service in case of death of Kotwal employee while in service or due to serious illness, accident
If the patient retires due to permanent medical incapacity to do so, his / her family
This Government, with a view to providing immediate relief to his family in the event of an economic calamity, is pleased to appoint his heirs to the office of Kotwal on compassionate grounds, in accordance with their qualifications for appointment to the office of Kotwal.
The decision is being approved.
2. Guidelines and detailed procedures for implementation of this Compassionate Policy, subject to independent Government decision.
will be determined.
3. The said Compassionate Policy shall come into force with effect from the date of this Government decision.
The Government decision is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.