# Page 1
sand / sand quarrying by the government,
Through storage and online system
A comprehensive strategy for sales
Maharashtra Government
Revenue and Forest Department
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q. NO. 75B-1
Madame Cama Marg, Mantralaya Mumbai-32
Date: February 16, 2024
Read: -
1) Chapter V of the Maharashtra Minor Mineral Exploration (Development and Regulation) Rules, 2013.
Government Decision Revenue and Forest Department No. Gaukani - 10/1222 Q. No.82 / B-1
Date 19.04.2023
3) Government Refinery Revenue & Forest Department No. Gaukani - 10/1222 Q. No.82 / B-1
Date 20.04.2023
4) Government Refinery Revenue & Forest Department No. Gaukani - 10/1222 Q. No.82 / B-1
Date 21.04.2023
Government Decision Revenue and Forest Department No. Gaukani - 10/1222 Q. No.82 / B-1
Date 27.09.2023
6) Government Circular Revenue & Forest Department No: Gaukhani 10/0119 Q. No.5 / B-2
Date 12.02.2019
7) Government Decision Water Resources Department No: - Nadiga 2022 / P.S. (299/2022) C.V. (M),
Date 25.07.2023
8) Government Circular Public Works Department No: Narrow-2019 / Q.No.39 / Yambasa
Date 13.11.2019
9) Government Circular Water Resources Department No: PLN-2020 / Q. No.32 / As (Policy)
10) Date 11.08.2020
11) Revenue and Forest Department Government Letter No. Gokhani 10/0723 Q. No.34 / B-1, dated 28.07.2023
The Proposal: -
In Chapter V of the Maharashtra Minor Mineral Exploration (Development and Regulation) Rules, 2013,
Provisions have been made regarding the discharge of sand / sand from drains, rivers and creeks in Rule 70.
"Procedure with respect to the terms and conditions of auction, appropriation, etc. by the Government from time to time.
shall be specified by instructions, "it provides.
To obtain commercial or revenue for tendering or licensing sand mining.
The main objective is to make available the sand required for development work, not the sole purpose. as well as
The sand accumulation in the riverbed has led to a flood-like situation in the surrounding area.
excavation is carried out.
# Page 2
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
Rivers and dams in Maharashtra have large deposits of sand. In the last few years
It has also been observed that the river's sand deposits during the monsoons lead to a partial flood.
A situation had arisen. Also, the dam water is due to silt, silt mixed sand in the dam.
The storage capacity is decreasing day by day. Accordingly, the Water Resources Department took the decision of its government.
Number: - Nadiga 2022 / Q. (299/2022) C.V. (M), dated 25.07.2023 - Maharashtra
The carrying capacity of the notified rivers flowing along the urban and peri-urban areas of the state has been restored.
The policy and procedures for doing so have been laid down. According to this policy, the siltation and erosion of the river
Also to remove silt-caused islands, river bed obstructions, etc. in the river basin.
Provision has been made for action to be taken through the Water Resources Department.
dated 28/03/2020 of the Department of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India.
Dredging and dredging of riverbed silt, silt mixed sand as per the notification.
De-silting of dams, rivers, canals, etc. ) Exemption from obtaining environmental clearance for this purpose.
This type of operation can be done mechanically. As well as water resources
In view of the Government decision issued by the Department while desilting the riverbed, along with
The possibility of excavation of sand also cannot be ruled out. This has led to the flood situation in the state.
Department of Water Resources River Management for matters such as mitigation, restoration / streamlining of the river
Removal of silt, silt mixed sand from such a place if certain groups / sites are identified in the container.
The Water Resources Department may authorize the Collector. Similarly, Maharashtra for the Bay of Bengal
The Marine Board may also authorise the Collector or the flow of the creek to be appropriate.
If excavated by the Board for maintenance, the sand can be sold to the citizens as above.
Department of Mines, Government of India Sand Mining Framework-2018 in March, 2018
has been published. It involves studying some of the prominent states of the country while releasing sand / sand.
Some guidelines have been given regarding the essentials. As well as Ma. The National Green
The Tribunal (NGT) held that O.A.No. Central Government on 19/09/2018 in 368/2015
Sustainable Sand Mining in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
Guidelines, 2016, Sand Mining Framework, 2018 and Enforcement & Monitoring Guidelines
The policy was directed to be suitably modified as per the For Sand Mining, 2020. According to the Centre
New sand / sand in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India
Director, Directorate of Geology and Mines to formulate the Export Policy.
The sand policies of some of the prominent states were studied by setting up a committee headed by him.
According to the. New Revised Sand / Sand Export Policy vide Government Decision dated 28/01/2022
were released. This sand / sand policy has been modified to make it cheaper for the citizens of the state.
Sand by the Government with the objective of providing sand at affordable rates and preventing unauthorised mining.
Comprehensive policy decisions on excavation, storage management and online sales
It was released on a pilot basis for 1 year under the date 19.04.2023.
2 out of 31 pages
# Page 3
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
The problems arising at the regional level in pursuance of this sand policy and the policy will befall the government.
Considering the financial burden, the sand is emitted on a pilot basis for 1 year.
Reforms in the policy were under the consideration of the government.
The Government's Decisions:
Reforms in the policy of sand mining, storage and sale management by the government.
Issued under Government Decision No. Gokhani- 10/1222 Q. No.82 / B-1 dated 19.04.2023
The sand policy made and issued on the corresponding date 20.04.2023 and date 21.04.2023
The revised sand policy is being fixed as follows by modifying the purity sheet.
Case No. 1
I] Inspection and determination of sand / sand groups:
a) In the Bay of Bengal to facilitate navigation in the Maharashtra coastal area.
Inspection and determination of sand / sand groups: -
1) Timeline for facilitating navigation in Maharashtra coastal areas.
Since sand / sand needs to be excavated, the sand in such a place
Excavations are made available by the Maharashtra Maritime Board by "May" every year.
Determine the sand / sand groups based on the survey data available,
2) By mechanical / dredger method in the coastal regulation zone.
Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority for sand / sand mining.
(Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority) Pre-approval Main
The Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board will be required to take over. "
3) Dredgers for sand / sand excavation in the group to clear the navigational route.
Chief Executive if required to use mechanical equipment such as
the concerned Collector / Additional on behalf of the Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board
As per the recommendation of the District Level Sand Control Committee of the Collector, "Mechanical
The reserve groups for sand / sand excavation by means of tools will be marked as. "
4) Sand mining and transportation in the Bay Area falling within the Marine Regulation Zone.
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Government of India
Listed in the Dredging Guidelines for Major Ports, 2021
Tenders should be prepared as per the guidelines made, as well as Geophysical and
The process of excavations should be carried out according to Geotechnical Investigation.
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India dated 14th September, 2006.
Appointment of Accredited Environment Consultant as per the provision in the notification.
will be done. "Proposal for funding required for environmental clearance is key
Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board to the concerned Collector
Submitted under District Mineral Trust. "
Page 3 of 31
# Page 4
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
6) Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board from the coastal area.
Sand / sand in the area to be excavated for drying the navigation route
Groups, their geographical location, estimated reserves of sand / sand, easy navigation
Determine the extent of excavation to be carried out and the available approaches, etc.
Later, the sand determined by the Maharashtra Maritime Board /
To make arrangements for sand / sand mining from sand blocks and on this arrangement.
The concerned District Collector shall be authorised to maintain law and order.
7) Local people in the coastal areas of Maharashtra have their traditional
Intertidal on the coast / bay to make it possible to do business
Main for excavation of sand / sand in the area by submersion / hand-drawn method.
On behalf of the Executive Officer, Maharashtra Maritime Board, the concerned Collector /
As per the recommendation of the Additional Collector District Level Sand Control Committee
"For excavation of sand / sand by immersion / hand-drawing in the form of Request for License.
The final decision will be taken by marking "Reserved Groups."
8) Reserved for excavation of sand / sand by submersible / handloom method.
By charging ownership money to the person / organization concerned for the sale of sand in the group.
The online transport license should be made available by the concerned Collector.
b) Inspection and determination of river bed sand / sand groups: -
1) The following technical sub-committees shall conduct site inspection of the river bed sand groups:
It will be done: -
1. Tehsildar President
Deputy Engineer, Water Resources Department Member
3. Minimum Geological Member
(Nominated by the Directorate of Geological Mining)
4. Minimum Geological Member
(Nominated by Ground Water Surveillance and Development Agency)
5. Representative Member, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board Department
2) Technical Sub-Committee on Environment and Climate Change due to sand mining in areas prone to sedimentation and persistent scarcity.
Determine sand / sand groups in areas where availability of drinking water is affected.
New.
3) Local rainfall and topography while determining the sand group through this Technical Sub-Committee.
Conditions and other environmentally friendly factors, consideration of sand replenishment
Taluk-level sand control on whether or not sand blocks are suitable for excavation
The committee will make a recommendation.
4 out of 31 pages
# Page 5
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
II] Sand Control Committee: -
(1) The Taluk-Level Sand Control Committee-
Taluka-level Sand Control Committee for each Taluka of the district (Taluka Sand)
Monitoring Committee) will be set up. (The Committee shall be referred to hereinafter.)
It will be made as a "Taluk Level Committee." The composition of the Committee shall be as follows: -
1. Sub-Divisional Officer Chairman
Sub-Divisional Police Officer Member
3. Minimum Geological Member
(Nominated by the Directorate of Geology and Mining)
4. Minimum Geological Member
(Nominated by Ground Water Surveillance and Development Agency)
Group Development Officer, Panchayat Samiti Member
Executive Engineer, Public Works Department Member
Executive Engineer, Water Resources Department Member
8. Representative Members of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board
Representative members of the Regional Transport Officer
10. Tehsildar Member Secretary
The committee is headed by other expert persons for advice and guidance on a particular issue.
Officers may appoint them as invited members.
The powers and functions of the Taluk Level Sand / Sand Control Committee are as follows: -
1) The meeting of the Taluk Level Committee should be held at least once in two months.
2) The Taluk Level Committee shall determine the sand blocks available for tender in their area.
It will make such a recommendation to the district-level committee.
3) Taluk Level Committee Estimates the excavation from the sand blocks earmarked for sand mining.
Determines the size. Standardized map of the group with latitude and longitude when determining the sand group
submission will be required.
4) Taluk Level Committee is the district level committee for the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines,
2016, Sand Mining Framework, 2018, Enforcement & Monitoring Guidelines for
Sand Mining, 2020 and Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India
It will assist in the preparation of the District Survey Report as per the directions given from time to time.
5) List of sand blocks determined by the Taluk Level Committee through online e-tendering mode.
It will be submitted to the district level committee for announcement.
6) The committee is excavating from the sand block as per the terms and conditions in the environmental clearance or
How to control and supervise it.
7) The Committee shall make recommendations at the district level as may be necessary for the effective implementation of this Policy.
The sand will make it to the control committee.
5 out of 31 pages
# Page 6
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
8) Searching for available sand deposits in the field as well as alternatives to riverbed sand mining.
Therefore, the committee is also concerned with finding other sources (e.g. clayey sand, dam sand, etc.).
Will recommend.
9) The Committee shall be constituted for the notified area in accordance with or within the provisions of the PESA Act, 2011.
It will determine the sand groups according to the amendments made from time to time.
10) In addition to the above, the Taluk Level Committee is the District Level Sand Control Committee from time to time.
Will fulfill the assigned responsibilities.
Information about the matters mentioned on the Taluk Level Control Committee District
will be submitted to the Control Committee.
(2) The District Level Sand Control Committee-
District to regulate the entire process of sand / sand clearance in each district.
The District Sand Monitoring Committee will be constituted. (To be continued
Which will be referred to as "District Level Committee." (a) The composition of the committee
It will be as follows: -
1. Chairman of the Collectorate
Chief Executive Officer, Zilla Parishad Member
Superintendent of Police / Commissioner of Police Member
4. Member, Additional Collector
Superintending Engineer, Public Works Department Member
Executive Engineer, Water Resources Department Member
7. Deputy Conservator of Forests Member
8. Member, Regional Transport Officer
Regional Officer, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board Member
Senior Geologist, Ground Water Surveillance System Member
11. Representative of Maharashtra Maritime Board (for the Bay Area) Member
12. District Mining Officer Member Secretary
The Chairman of the Committee, other experts and other persons for advice and guidance on a particular issue.
Officers may appoint them as invited members.
The powers and functions of the District Level Control Committee are as follows: -
(1) The Committee shall meet at least once in three months.
2) Digitization of sand blocks in the district to be reported to the appropriate Sanitary Control Committee.
Action should be taken to take into account the fireplace system.
3) After considering the proposals received from the Taluk Level Committees as well as if required.
By making such changes as may be necessary, the District Level Committee shall take action as follows: -
6 out of 31 pages
# Page 7
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
i) Set up sand blocks to make sand reserves available at the sand depots.
ii) Local persons to extract sand by traditional methods such as handlooms / sinks, as well as
The sand blocks will be reserved for licensing to local bodies.
4) Provide recommendation for environmental clearance of sand groups for the above mentioned purpose.
will do.
5) All procedures regarding sand band determination and excavation are as follows. by the National Green Tribunal
Directions issued from time to time as well as the Central Government's Environment, Forest and Climate Change
Ensure compliance with the provisions of the notification issued by the Ministry from time to time.
Will take it.
6) Preparation of District Survey Report for environmental clearance and other related works.
The committee will have the power to appoint an approved advisor to do so.
7) The Committee shall take appropriate decisions on sand / sand quarrying / development and transportation as required.
Will take it.
8) For effective implementation of this decision, the committee shall be constituted by the Government of the district /
Necessary instructions have been issued to the officials of the semi-government and local bodies.
will do.
9) Subject to the provisions, terms and conditions and conditions set out in this Policy, the Committee
To excavate sand from sand blocks and transport it to sand depots, to create and manage depots.
It will recommend to the Collector for approval through tender.
10) Reducing the risk of flood situation in the state, such as restoring / streamlining the river
For matters relating to Water Resources Department vide Government Decision dated 25.07.2023 in the State
The river is fixed. Removal of sand mixed with silt and silt from the riverbed.
The Water Resources Department has contacted the Collector and will take further action accordingly.
The Collector shall authorise the same.
11) Reducing the risk of flood situation in the state, such as restoring / streamlining the river
For matters as may be determined by the Government Decision dated 25.07.2023 of the Department of Water Resources.
Apart from rivers, other rivers in the district are less prone to natural calamities and floods.
The Water Resources Department has decided to remove sand mixed with silt from the river bed.
Removal of silt, silt mixed sand from such places if certain groups / sites are identified.
District Disaster Management Authority District Collector on the recommendation of Water Resources Department
They can be authorized.
12) Similarly, the Maharashtra Maritime Board shall also authorise the Collector for the Bay of Bengal.
Excavations by the Maharashtra Marine Board to maintain the flow in the lagoon
If done, the sand can be sold to the citizens as above.
13) The sand stock available in the sand depots of the district and the sand of that district.
Considering the demand, the district level committee will consider the general public / consumers, household beneficiaries,
7 out of 31 pages
# Page 8
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
Determination of the amount of sand to be made available to government agencies and builders
Full sand should be made available to eligible household beneficiaries as per eligibility.
14) To review the functioning of the sand depots to be operationalized as per the present policy. as well as the sand
District Control in case of breach of terms and conditions of tender by the depot tenderer.
The Committee shall have the power to cancel the tender.
III) The recommendation of the Gram Sabha -
A river within a scheduled area as per the Panchayat Extension (Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA)
It will be mandatory to take the recommendation of the Gram Sabha for the sand block in the basin. In other areas
There will be no need to take the recommendation of the Gram Sabha for the forest group.
IV] To provide sand for major Central / State Government projects: -
Departments concerned to ensure availability of sand for major Central / State Government projects.
The Collector should reserve suitable sand blocks / ghats for them, if requested.
Group / Ghat by paying the amount of ownership and District Mineral Trust Fund to that department as per rules.
Bring it and make it available. The demand was made by the district head of the department concerned, the Collector.
It will be necessary to take into account the demand made by the contractor for the work concerned.
It won't come. The responsibility of excavation and transportation through this group / ghat rests with the concerned department.
If the site is illegally excavated and sold, the department concerned
The group / wharf which was held responsible and kept in reserve should be cancelled.
Central and State Government agencies if sufficient quantity of sand is available in the sand depots.
Sand from the Sand Depot at the selling price of the respective Depot as prescribed in the present policy.
should be made available.
V] Under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana and for housing of beneficiaries belonging to Economically Backward Classes.
The list submitted by the competent authority shall be verified by the Tehsildar concerned and given written permission to do so.
After that, the sand seized in illegal excavation and transportation operations, as well as free of cost from the sand depot.
Sand should be made available. For these beneficiaries, the Talathi concerned has provided the said house.
Depending on the size of the sand specified in the construction plan or a maximum of 5 brass points
Provide them with an online sand transportation pass, whichever is less, at their doorstep.
will be arranged. The cost of transportation will have to be borne by the beneficiary. After the availability of sand, the beneficiaries
It will be mandatory for them to submit the transport pass back to the concerned taluka. These matters
The record must be taken in the Great Fire system.
8 out of 31 pages
# Page 9
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
Case No.2
I] Mining plan for sand / sand mining -
Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016, Sand Mining Framework, 2018,
Enforcement & Monitoring Guidelines for Sand Mining, 2020 and Environment, Government of India,
through the Collectorate as per the directions issued by the Ministry of Forest and Climate Change from time to time.
The District Collectorate of the sand blocks will prepare a mining plan for a period of 3 years at the earliest.
Accordingly, it will submit a proposal for environmental clearance to the Environment Committees for a period of 3 years.
II) Environmental clearance -
a) Environmental clearance for sand / sand mining from the sand dunes in the bay basin -
1) Ma. The Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition No. (C) No. 19628-19629/2009
In the According to the order on 27/02/2012 and ma. the National Green Tribunal,
The Western Division, Bench Pune passed the order on the petition No. Dated in 34 (THC) / 2013 (WZ)
Central Government prior to sand / sand mining as per order dated 29.05.2014
Notification dated 14th September, 2006 of the Department of Environment and Forests (EIA)
Notification-2006) Provided that the Chief Executive shall take action for obtaining environmental clearances.
The officer will be required to do so by the Maharashtra Maritime Board. Department of Environment
Consensual environmental clearance should be taken up within 3 years.
2) "Sand / sand by hand band in the backwaters through Vinalilao Licensing System"
The reserve group for excavation "includes local persons who carry on traditional occupations, as well as
To obtain environmental clearance for grant of sand / sand mining licences to the entities of such persons.
It's not necessary. In this regard, the District Collector concerned has issued a Central Environment, Forest and Climate Change Order.
Changes in the notification issued by the Ministry dated 24/11/2022
Action should be taken as per the rules.
b) Environmental clearance for sand / sand mining in the river basin -
1) The Supreme Court of India, MA. The High Court, Md. National Green Tribunal from time to time
Directions issued as well as the Central Government's Environment, Forest and Climate Change
Environment as provided in the notification issued by the Ministry from time to time
Proceedings are required regarding permissions and ancillary matters. The environmental permit
The sand cannot be excavated unless it is obtained.
2) Environment, Forest and Atmosphere of the Central Government before sand mining from sand / sand blocks.
Scope of work from time to time as notified by the Ministry of Change from time to time
Expert Appraisal Committee and Environmental Impact
the Environment Impact Assessment Authority or
9 out of 31 pages
# Page 10
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
Proposals of the district sand block for the approval of the committees are considered on the basis of scrutiny.
the District Mining Officer as the Project Promoter in the form so made.
be submitted to the committee. 3 years with the consent of the Department of Environment
The process of obtaining environmental clearance should be done by the collector.
3) Accredited Environmental Consultant as required for environmental clearance.
will be appointed. The expenditure for this is met from the District Mineral Trust Fund.
This can be met through grants available for the environment.
4) Accredited to the meeting at which the proposals will be placed for consideration.
The District Mining Officer along with the Environment Consultant were present on the occasion.
will remain.
5) Environment before the Environment Committee, as the case may be, as the project promoter.
Environmental clearance in the rank of the officer who submitted the proposal for the permit
It will be.
6) Environment, Forest and Atmosphere of the Central Government before sand mining from sand / sand blocks.
Scope of work from time to time as notified by the Ministry of Change from time to time
Expert Appraisal Committee and Environment
the Environment Impact Assessment Authority or
The process of getting the approval of the committees should be done after determining the sand groups.
Case No.3
The tendering process
I] General guidelines for the tendering process
1) Sand excavated and excavated from river / basin sand blocks suitable for construction
Tenders for transportation of sand, sand depots, sand depot construction and management
process should be carried out.
2) Advertisement of the tender in two major newspapers of the district at least before the tender is drawn.
It should be published 15 days in advance. All sectoral revenue towards it.
Notice boards should be put up in the office of the officers. As well as advertising
It should also be posted on the government website.
3) If any complaints / objections / suggestions are received regarding the proposed tender
District Collector / Additional Collector and Divisional Commissioner in case of Joint Sand Block
It should be investigated / quizzed by the concerned sand team in pursuance of the inquiry.
Appropriate decision will be taken regarding the tender process.
4) The District Collector or the Additional Collector concerned in the tendering process of all the sand blocks in the district.
It should be carried out under the personal control and supervision of the Collector.
10 out of 31 pages
# Page 11
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
The Collector or the Additional Collector has to do this work in any case.
No other officer may be appointed.
5) If less than 3 bids are received, a re-tendering process should be adopted. such as this
By the way, if more than 3 or 3 bids have not been received even after running the bidding process 3 times, then
The right to accept bids received or to decide how
The Collector / Divisional Commissioner, as the case may be.
6) The date and time of the opening of the tender should be published.
7) The lowest bidder is the successful bidder.
will be understood.
8) The successful bidder will be awarded within 02 days from the office of the Collector.
A letter of intent (LOI) should be processed.
9) The government will enter into an agreement with the tender holder. And then from the sand
Permission to excavate sand and bring and store sand in sand depots
will be provided.
10) The person participating in the tendering process whose bid / tender was accepted
If not, the reserve amount (EMD) they paid to participate in the bidding process.
The consideration of Rs. 10.00 should be returned immediately at the close of the tender process.
11) Security Deposit: - Payment of the following amount of security deposit to the successful tender holder.
It will be mandatory.
Amount of available reserve (Brass) security deposit
5000 p.a. reserves - 10 lakhs
5001 - 10,000 pice reserves - 20 lakhs
10,001-20, 000 piñat reserves - 40 lakhs
Over 20,001 stocks - 60 lakhs
The deposit amount (EMD) paid by the successful bidder into the security deposit amount
should be adjusted.
12) Decision to accept or reject the lowest bidder in the tender
Additional Collector / Collector or Divisional Commissioner, as the case may be
The decision has to be made and must be communicated to the person concerned. Tender
If the decision to decline is made, detailed reasons should be recorded.
13) Sand / sand quarrying from sand blocks, sand sand with successful bidder.
Depot transport, depot construction and management to be carried out in accordance with the tender.
The contract must be registered. This agreement is signed after the Letter of Intent (LOI) has been entered into.
It should be done in 15 days.
14) The tenderer should be given actual possession of the sand site after entering into the agreement.
Excavation will need to begin within 30 days of possession. There's some
Due to unavoidable reasons, it is possible for the tenderer to start the sand depot during this period.
11 out of 31 pages
# Page 12
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
If not, the bidder should be given a 15-day notice of extension. That's
If the depot is not opened within the stipulated time, the tender is cancelled and the security deposit is forfeited.
should be done.
15) Located in the sand block from where the tenderer is going to excavate the sand.
Considering the sand deposit and the time period fixed for it, the bidder
The Collector determined how much sand needed to be mined per day.
Make sure to do so, as well as make sure excavations are taking place each month. somebody's
If there is no excavation in a month or if there is a significant reduction in excavation
The District Control Committee will examine the reasons for cancellation of the tender.
Make a decision.
16) Sand mining from sand blocks, transportation to sand depots, depot construction and depot management
Mahakhanij system or Government directed by the respective tenderer
It will be mandatory to use such a system.
17) Depot holders to be paid based on the quantity of sand sold from the depot
will be done.
Initially, excavations should be carried out in the year as per the mining plan.
40% of the total volume after excavation and storage in depots.
The amount should be paid as per the tender rate of the sand.
Thereafter, the quantity of sand sold from the depot will be sold at the tender rate.
80% of the proceeds must be paid in a phased manner in proportion to the sales.
After the completion of the excavation, which was to be carried out in that year, the excavation was carried out like a rock.
or all those deposited in the depot after the expiry of the excavation period of that year.
The total quantity of sand sold from the depot after the sale of the sand will be bid for.
Between the total amount as per the rate and the amount paid to the bidder from time to time.
The difference must be paid.
For example, let's say a sand depot excavates 10,000 tons of sand in the first year and
The sale is to be made and the successful bidder for the group will be priced at Rs. 500 / - each
The amount will be paid to the tenderer as follows.
Initially, 40% i.e. 4000 tonnes of sand was mined and deposited in the depot.
After that, pay 4000X500 = 20,00,000.
Thereafter, the remaining 6000 tonnes were excavated in a phased manner during the excavation period.
A total of 9500 tonnes of actual sand sales taking into account a reduction / deficit of 500 tonnes.
The remaining amount of Rs. 5500X500 = 27,50,000 - 80% of
The amount is Rs. 22,00,000 - Pay in stages.
On completion of the excavation period and sale of all the sand stock from the depot
The remaining amount of Rs. 9500 X500 = 47,50,000 - minus east
12 out of 31 pages
# Page 13
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
Amount paid Rs 42,00,000 - (20,00,000 - + 22,00,000 -) = Right
20% of the amount of Rs. 5,50,000 - to be paid.
Thus, the total amount paid is Rs. 47,50,000 - This will be it.
18) Sand dredging in river / basin dredges, transportation of depots, and
The bidder should bear the loss / loss arising from the sale of sand from the depot.
It will have to.
19)
19) The Divisional Commissioner / Collector shall provide such conditions and conditions as he may deem necessary.
will be allowed to include
II] Jurisdiction for bidding for the excavation, transportation and storage of sand from sand blocks: -
1) Depot of sand quarried and quarried sand from all the sand blocks in the district.
Tender process for construction and management of transport, depots at district level
It should be implemented under the control of the Collector.
(2) If a sand block falls jointly in two districts of a revenue division,
The two Collectors jointly inspected and consulted the joint sand team.
Therefore, a determination should be made and a report should be submitted to the Divisional Commissioner in this regard.
Thereafter, the Divisional Commissioner shall be one of the two District Collectors who shall be
The district collector will direct action against the joint sand quarry.
Sand mining from joint sand groups, transportation of sand to depots, sand depot construction and
A bidding process should be put in place for the management.
(iii) If a sand block falls jointly between two districts in two revenue divisions,
Even in such cases, the two Collectors conducted joint inspections and consultations.
The report in this regard should be submitted to both the concerned Divisional Commissioners. the Departmental
The Commissioner, in consultation with one of the two District Collectors, shall
The District Collector shall direct the tendering process to be carried out.
Sand excavation from sand blocks and transportation of excavated sand to sand depots, sand depots
The tendering process for manufacturing and management should be completed. such a joint.
If the two Divisional Commissioners do not agree on the tender process for the sand quarry
A self-explanatory proposal in this regard should be submitted to the government for a decision.
The government's decision will be final.
III] Procedure for sand quarrying, transportation, depots formation and management: -
1. Sand excavation from sand blocks and excavated constructional sand depots.
The tender process should be carried out for transportation, depot construction, management.
2. Duration of excavation of sand blocks Environmental, forest and climatic changes of the Central Government.
The Collector has decided to take into account the orders issued by the Ministry from time to time.
The area of the sand dunes is also available for excavation up to 5 hectares or in this group.
13 out of 31 pages
# Page 14
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
It should be determined according to the sand deposit. Sand group determination process, group sand
The process of excavation will be as follows: -
a) The mining plan as per the annual plan made for that year.
About the excavations to be carried out from that year on the sand dune map and at the actual area level.
The extent to be determined and thus the excavation to be carried out during the tender period.
Planning has to be done.
b) Any re-excavation in the excavated area as per the mining plan
Care should be taken not to do so.
IV] Required qualifications for tender holders:
a) Sand excavation from sand blocks and transportation to and from excavated sand depots
Qualifications required for bidders to manage
1) Any person or company / institution participating in the tendering process to:
Ineligible for the following reasons: -
a. a person who is ignorant, insolvent, or mentally retarded by age, or
b. a person holding an office of profit in the Central or State Government; or
c. arrears or mortgages of previous ownership of the minor mineral
The person / institution for which the amount is due (Dead Rent)
Ownership of minor mineral by the Collectorate for the purpose,
A list of those who owe the decedent money, or government revenue.
It should be prepared and published from time to time.
d. for committing moral turpitude or illegal mining of a minor mineral; or
A person who has been convicted by a court of law for transporting /
the institution.
e. The turnover of the bidder in the immediately preceding financial year is above the prescribed limit.
If there is less.
2) Regularity of the last 3 years with the person / institution participating in the tender process.
Proof of income tax payment, PAN number, GSTIN of the Goods and Services Tax Department
A number will be required.
3) Sand excavation from sand blocks and transportation of excavated sand to sand depots, depots
Tenders to individuals / entities who wish to bid for creation and management
The application fee is Rs. 5,000 / - in the name of the District Collector of the concerned district.
Fill in the form online or as may be notified by the Collector.
It will have to.
4) Deposit amount (EMD) along with the tender to the person / institution participating in the tender process.
Hence, Rs. An amount of 10.00 lakh will have to be paid.
14 out of 31 pages
# Page 15
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
V] Terms and Conditions of the tender
a) Terms and Conditions for the excavation of sand from the sand block, transportation of sand to the depot after excavation: -
1) All the sand dunes. The Supreme Court, Md. The High Court, Md. National Green Tribunal from time to time
Directions issued as well as by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India
shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the notification issued from time to time.
2) The maximum duration of the tender is up to 3 years (as prescribed in the Environmental Clearance).
period) or at the expiry of the sand reserve in the said sand block whichever is earlier.
It will be for the time being. The Collector is responsible for obtaining environmental clearance.
The renewal process should be carried out within the prescribed time before the environmental clearance expires.
The district collector should look into it.
3) The date 10th June to 30th September will be the rainy season and the sand during this period
It cannot be excavated. This should be clearly communicated to the tenderer concerned.
4) It is observed that illegal excavation and transportation in the state mainly take place at night.
Therefore, to prevent it, sand / sand from the river / basin should be excavated and deposited.
Transportation from 06.00 in the morning to 06.00 in the evening, as well as customers from sand depots
It will be mandatory to sell sand from 06.00 in the morning to 06.00 in the evening.
License for Sale of Sand (ETP) from Mahakhanji Online System
Changes to the Firefox software that won't generate after 6: 00 p.m.
should be done.
5) The following factors should be considered while determining the duration of the excavation: -
A. Annual rate of assessment of sand replenishment.
b. Groundwater Surveillance Development System as well as Sand Availability of Irrigation Department.
Feasibility report.
c. Local and geographical conditions specified in the environmental clearance and mining plan.
d.Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016, Sand Mining Framework, 2018 and
Guidelines in the Enforcement & Monitoring Guidelines for Sand Mining, 2020
Principles as well as guidelines issued by the Central and State Government from time to time.
6) Excavation in tender advertisement for excavation and transportation of sand from sand / sand blocks.
Duration, number seven of the sand / sand group, number of the sand / sand group, name of the sand / sand group,
Estimated sand / sand deposits in the sand / sand group should be highlighted.
7) Transport of sand from the sand block to the sand depot by "Rector" or a maximum of 6 tires (tippers).
It will be mandatory to do so by vehicle. If there is a problem with this, the collector
A proposal to this effect should be submitted to the government.
8) GPS system is mandatory for vehicles transporting sand from the group to the sand depot.
will remain.
Pages 31 to 15
# Page 16
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
9) The number of ractors and 6-tier tippers transporting sand from the sand block to the sand depot and
Their number should be registered. Sand transport by vehicles other than these vehicles
If found to have done so, such sand transportation is considered to be illegal.
Punitive action against the tenderers / contractors as per rules.
will be done.
10) A rally of vehicles transporting sand from the sand block to the sand depot and 6 tyre tippers.
The entire visual area should be yellow. The vehicle struck sand elsewhere except at the sand depot.
In case of transportation, the vehicle is impounded and penal action is taken against the tenderer, the vehicle.
Action will be taken against the driver and owner as per rules. Sand on the Sand Group / Ghats
Any vehicle other than a vehicle registered for transport under Geo-fence.
The bidder must be careful not to get into the area.
11) If the bidder is unable to excavate the sand, tender by forfeiting the security deposit amount.
Cancellation action should be taken.
It will be mandatory for the entire Geo Fence to be done on the sand dunes earmarked for excavation.
12) Sand / sand seized in illegal excavation and transportation operations is eligible from the government scheme.
Free sand at 5 brass points should be made available to the household beneficiaries. Home Beneficiaries
Where the seized sand remains after the sand is made available
The sand deposit made is at the nearest sand depot with a note from the tenderer.
Rector or a maximum of 6 tires (tipper) with a yellow front. such as this
The sand should be transported by vehicle to the nearest sand depot and stored and recorded in the Great Fire.
should be taken on the system. Seized sand / sands for transportation to Depot
The amount will not be admissible to the bidder.
13) Installation of CCTV in the sand dunes in the river / backwaters will be mandatory.
a. By tender holder for 24/7 photography at each sand dune site
CCTVs should be installed. At least one of these CCTV cameras is located where the sand
to be installed at the filling point and to transport the sand from the sand block
All the vehicles are from the place where they come and go in the village.
to be used for photography. CCTV installed in the sand dunes
The price will have to be borne by the bidders. Also not tendered
Traffic from places to avoid illegal transportation of sand from sand blocks
CCTV cameras should be installed in such places as well.
Action to be taken on the availability of funds from the District Planning Committee
should be done.
b. Address of CCTV installed by the tenderers Collector / Divisional Commissioner
And it will have to be given to the revenue and forest department of the government. sand by the tenderer
Tehsildar CD with photograph of excavation and transportation every 15 days
Deposits to the office will be mandatory.
16 out of 31 pages
# Page 17
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
c. The Tahsildar takes the photograph in this CD through his subordinate system.
Check it out. The Tehsildar and Sub Divisional Officer concerned shall, from time to time,
Such a photograph should also be checked.
VI] Rate of Bidding: -
Sand mining from sand blocks, transportation of sand after excavation to depots, depot construction, and
The cost of management is assumed to be the same as a single tender per metric ton.
should be removed. This will include the following expenses: -
1. Sand mining in river / creek basin, transportation of constructional sand to depots, sand mining.
Transportation costs, including loading and unloading.
Depot Manufacturing and Depot Management
3. Depot Construction and Depot Management Expenses (Wire Barbed Fence, CCTV on all sides of the Depot)
Installation, power supply (Ad ¬ Illumination), all facilities including internet, control room,
staff, stuffing equipment, etc.)
4. Electronic weight reduction. Electronic weightbridge with digital capacity of 50 tons
display), the cost of installation,
5. Cost of sand filling in the customer's vehicle.
6. The Collector shall determine the staff strength according to the size of the sand depot.
The cost of the tender for the implementation of the 7.Environment management plan
will be made by the holder.
8. Water Surveillance Fee (Hydrographic Savings Fee) for the Bay of Bengal Desert Group.
the expenditure.
The cost of implementing an 9.Corporate Environmental Responsibility Plan.
10. Ground water inspection cost.
Applicable to the tender amount as per the rules of the Maharashtra Goods and Services Act, 2017.
The tax.
Case Four
Depot creation and management
I] Provision of government or private land for sand depots: -
For transportation of sand / sand from river / basin to sand depots by excavation.
For the sand depots before the tender is floated by the Collector to determine the cost.
Land with Maharashtra Maritime Board for Government, Bay Basin Sand Depots
Action should be taken to take their consent or to fix private land. Only after that
A tendering process should be followed.
For quarrying, transportation and storage of sand / sands in creeks / river basins, the tender holder is eligible.
A place where the tenderer has a comfortable place available near the excavation area to be determined.
17 out of 31 pages
# Page 18
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
The bidder will be allowed to choose with the approval of the Collector. for this private land.
The amount of lease will not be admissible beyond the limit of Rs.30,000 / - per acre per annum.
Government / Maharashtra Maritime Board made available for construction of sand depots
No rent will be charged for their land. However, the Government / Maharashtra Maritime Board's
Private if the land is not available or if the tenderer does not have a comfortable place available.
Lease amount is admissible for land subject to a ceiling of Rs.30,000 / -per acre per annum.
Necessary funds for this will be made available separately.
II] Depot formation for small sand groups: -
Creation of separate depots for each small sand block in the district or taluka.
The collector is the only one for such a group of sand blocks if it is not economical or not possible.
Depots can produce. And which bidder has the job of managing the depot in such a place?
The tender should clearly state that it will be handed over.
III] Depot Formation and Management Terms and Conditions
1) Sale of sand from sand depots through Mahakhanjis or online system to be decided by the government.
will be done.
2) Government land can be used if available to construct sand depots.
Renting private land where road is available in case of non-availability of government space.
First, it should be taken for a period of 3 years, followed by the required period of time.
Renovation can be done.
3) It will be mandatory to fence the sand depots of sand storage with barbed wire.
4) CCTVs should be installed in every sand depot for 24/7 photography. The Weighbridge
Installation of CCTVs at (weight-cutting) sites and at places where sand depots will be inspected.
Come.
5) The sand depot should have a control room, security system.
6) The tender holder will be responsible for getting the power supply to the sand depot operational.
7) If the power supply at the sand depot is interrupted due to some unavoidable reason, the depot
Generator of the required capacity so that the operation is not affected.
The responsibility of installation will be of the tender holder.
8) It is mandatory to install an electronic digital weightbridge at the site of the sand depot.
will remain.
9) Delivery of sand to customers from the sand depot before sand / sand is dumped in the sand depot as well as from the sand depot.
The weight of the sand before it is cast on the Weighbridge (weight fork) is the relevant tender.
The SMS alert will be sent to the holder, the concerned customer, and the government agencies through the fire alarm system.
Such a system will have to be created.
10) Creation of computerized system for sale of sand from sand depots, stock register,
The inward and outward (sales) register will need to be computerized.
11) The sand should be sold in metric tons.
18 out of 31 pages
# Page 19
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
12) Information about the remaining sand reserves and sold sand reserves at the site of the sand depot.
It will be mandatory to register online on this system every day.
13) Sand excavation in river / basin dredges, transportation of depots and sand from depots.
The bidder will have to bear the loss / loss arising out of the sale.
14) Without paying the amount to the successful bidder as per the quantity of sand excavated
The amount should be paid according to the quantity sold directly from the depot.
Case 5
I] General Essay and Terms / Conditions: -
The general terms and conditions for sand / sand mining shall be as follows:
Incorporation in the contract to be entered into with the concerned tenderer / licensee without fail.
It will be mandatory: -
1) Placing a plaque at the site of the sand block sanctioned to him by the tenderer / licensee,
It will be mandatory to demarcate the excavation area and erect pillars indicating the boundary. Vithit
Sand / sand cannot be excavated outside the area covered. as well as the bidder
Appointed to oversee the functioning of the sand block with the prior permission of the Collector.
A plaque showing the names, addresses, and location details of the managers and employees employed is appropriate.
It will be necessary to put it in place.
2) Special Leave Petition (C) No. In 19628-19629/2009
Order dated 27/02/2012 as well as the riverbed water clean and purified
From sand / sand groups to live and naturally carry water to the riverbed.
Maximum depth of 3 metres or water level whichever is lower.
or as much as the room allowed in the environmental permit, whichever is less.
Sand / sand can be excavated by the tenderer / licensee within the room itself.
3) Setting benchmarks to ensure that the thickness of the sand layer in the river basin remains constant.
Under no circumstances can the sand be excavated below, the fixed bench mark
will not fall, as well as in the surrounding wells, depending on the sand layer in the river basin.
The water level will not go down. Appropriate care must be taken by the bidder in this regard.
will remain.
4) The tenderer is entitled to excavate the same amount of sand as sanctioned in the tender.
It will be.
5) It is observed that illegal excavation and transportation in the state mainly take place at night.
Therefore, to prevent it, sand / sand from the river / basin is to be mined and
Depot transportation from 06.00 in the morning to 06.00 in the evening, as well as from the sand depot
It will be mandatory for customers to sell sand from 06.00 in the morning to 06.00 in the evening.
19 out of 31 pages
# Page 20
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
6) Evening License for Sale of Sand (ETP) from Mahakhanij Online System
Making changes to the Firefox software that won't generate after 6: 00 p.m.
Come.
7) A distance of 600 metres (2000 ft) on any side of any railway bridge and road bridge.
Sand cannot be mined inside.
8) Irrigation Department / Divisional Commissioner at places having Kolhapur system of dams.
It will be necessary to adhere to the restriction of the distance limit set by the / Collector.
9) 100 metres from the place where the public water body / water supply system is located or
Extraterrestrial exploration as determined by the Ground Water Surveillance and Development System
It will be necessary.
10) Sand / sand cannot be removed from land used as roads / footpaths.
11) Depot transport of sand from the riverbed through Rector or maximum of 6 tires (tipper).
should be done.
12) The tenderer should construct a depot on the side of the main road near the sand pit.
13) The area allotted to the tenderer for excavation of sand / sand from the riverbed / drain.
Danger to natural resources and the environment while excavating sand / sand from the area where it has been excavated
The bidder has to take all precautions to ensure that it does not happen.
14) The date of issue of the said Government Decision by the consumers who are 19.04.2023
For customers who have previously registered for a dry purchase online according to the policy,
The sand should be sold as per the policy.
15) After finalization of tender for sand depot and creation of depot by the tenderer.
This is due to the violation of the terms and conditions mentioned in the said Government decision by the Depot holder.
In case of de-approval of the Depot, online sale of sand from the Depot beyond the date of de-approval.
By providing them preferential sand from the nearest sand depots, if registered.
Give it.
16) In case of de-registration of the Depot due to irregularity of the tenderer, without the approval of the Government, the
Depots should not be allowed to open.
17) The tenderer should not infringe upon the right of the villagers to leave.
18) Daily accounts of sand / sands excavated by the tenderer and stored in the depot.
It is also necessary to keep a record. These registers and other accounting documents are the District Mining
Officers, Mining Inspectors, Revenue Officers as well as District Collectors and Geology and Mining
By making available the inspection officers of the Directorate at the site of excavation.
be given.
19) The customer's Aadhaar number will be mandatory for the sale of sand from the sand depot. The customer's own
Sand should be used only for construction. The sand was not used for self
If found, appropriate action should be taken against them as per the rules.
20 out of 31 pages
# Page 21
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
20) The sand stock available in the sand depots of the district and the sand of that district.
Considering the demand, the district level committee will consider the general public / consumers, household beneficiaries,
Determination of the amount of sand to be made available to government agencies and builders
Full sand should be made available to eligible household beneficiaries as per eligibility.
21) Customers who want sand can purchase sand on the Mahakhanij system.
The request will need to be recorded. Customers who cannot afford this can do so through the Setu Centre.
This request can be recorded. The processing fee of the Setu Seva Kendra is fixed by the Collector.
Do it.
22) For construction to be carried out at the place of Municipal Corporation, Municipal Corporation, Nagar Panchayat.
as well as Central Government / State Government Government works and construction professionals, who
Defined in the construction plan of the construction site where sand is required for construction.
Certified by the competent authority to make sand available as per the quantity of sand
Construction plan / map done as well as registration under MAHARERA where required.
It will be mandatory to upload the certificate on the online system Mahakhanji.
23) The number and location mentioned in the construction plan should be recorded online.
Another person will not purchase sand using the same construction plan.
From a visual point of view, appropriate improvements should be made to the mineral system.
24) A large quantity of sand is being demanded from the builder or the company.
Because of the Ala, the builder / company that is going to construct the site.
A sum of money for the total amount of sand certified in the approved construction plan.
If paid to the government, the sand from the nearest or their chosen depot
Dimensions of the construction plan certified by the competent authority as per availability
Step-by-step steps should be taken to make sand available.
25) It is up to the customer to carry the sand from the sand depot within 15 days after the sand is ordered.
It will be mandatory. If the sand is not lifted within the prescribed time due to some unavoidable reason
The Tahsildar concerned may extend this period.
26) The Collector directed the Transport Department to take the sand from the sand depot to the citizens.
Salal sets the vehicle type-wise traffic rate per km and gives them the information.
For citizen information on the website as well as on the mahakhanij system.
be made available. Also, information about the transporters transporting sand at these rates is published.
should do.
27) While transporting sand, the sand in the vehicle is covered with plastic paper / tarpaulin only.
It is mandatory to transport sand. Failure to do so will result in penal action.
Come.
28) Constructionable sand stock by the tenderer by excavating sand from the river / creek basin.
It will be necessary to do it in the sand. Sand deposits along the river / creek basin in addition to depots
21 out of 31 pages
# Page 22
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
If found and from where the sand is being sold illegally
Immediate action should be taken to cancel the tender of this tender holder.
29) The tenderer shall transport the sand / sand of his tender site to his vehicle.
The same amount of sand should be transported as the carrying capacity. Sand in excess of carrying capacity
/ If found to be carrying sand, the entire sand in the vehicle is illegal.
Punitive action as per rules and regulations regarding over-speeding of motor vehicles.
Action should be taken as per the law.
30) In the event of an accident while excavating or transporting sand / sand, the tenderer shall
Report the accident to the nearest police station immediately.
31) If any major mineral is found while excavating sand / sand, the tenderer /
Contractor to Divisional Commissioner / Collector / Additional Collector within seven days.
It should be reported.
32) Tender / contract to the tenderer to someone else without prior approval of the Government.
cannot be transferred or allowed to be driven by anyone else, or
No partners can be taken after the tender.
33) How much has been excavated from the sand dunes sanctioned to them by the tenderer?
It is mandatory to submit the return to the Collector on the 10th of every month. J
The bidders will not submit the monthly returns within the stipulated time, sand against them.
Power to cancel tenders and to take penal action against them.
The Collector / Collector will have.
34) The Maharashtra Land Revenue Act, 1966, after the seizure of illegal sand / sand deposits.
Action should be taken as per rule 48 (7) and (8).
35) Information of vehicles to be used for sand transportation by the tenderer Tehsildar /
to the District Collector. Traffic in excess of the carrying capacity of the vehicle under any circumstances
Care should be taken not to do so.
36) Rectors (Roly) transporting sand / sand from the river / creek basin to the depots or a maximum of 6
These tipper vehicles will be required to be painted yellow.
37) Any damage to private property while excavating or extracting sand / sand /
In case of loss, it will be the responsibility of the bidder to compensate. such as this
The loss / damage shall be assessed by the competent authority and shall be
The decision shall be final and such amount shall be relevant to the recovery of arrears of land revenue.
will be recovered from the bidder.
II] Action to be taken if the tenderer contravenes the terms / conditions: -
1) If the bidders agree among themselves, the bids for certain sand dunes will be repeated.
No bidders come forward even after applying and this will lead to sand pit tenders.
Cannot, thus causing loss of revenue to the government by consensual and illegal
22 out of 31 pages
# Page 23
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
The tenderer, who has committed offences such as quarrying and transportation, will be blacklisted for the entire state.
(Black list) will be inserted.
2) Excavation deeper than the room allowed in the environmental permit.
If noticed, the reserve amount taken from the bidder is forfeited.
The tender should be cancelled. The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code also declared such excavations illegal.
Action should be taken in accordance with the provisions of section 48 (7) and (8) of 1966.
3) Valid ETP to the driver transporting sand / sand from the sand depot to the customer
It should be checked whether the traffic is passing or not. At the time of the inspection
If the driver concerned does not have a valid ETP or a traffic pass with a barcode
Maharashtra Land Revenue against the concerned for illegal mining / transportation of this sand.
Action should be taken as per Section 48 (7) and (8) of the Code, 1966.
4) If the tenderer concerned is found guilty in the case of illegal excavation and transportation
Action should be taken against them as per the prevailing rules.
Section of the Indian Penal Code against the concerned while taking action as per the prevailing rules,
Filing a case under sections 34,114,379, 392,393,394, 396, etc., Maharashtra Land
to take penal action under the provision of section 48 (7) of the Revenue Code, 1966 and
For machinery and transportation used for sand mining as provided in section 48 (8).
Seizure of Used Vehicles, Seizure of Illegal Dredged Sand, etc.
should be done.
5) Revenue Officer / while taking action in pursuance of illegal sand quarrying / transportation.
If employees are found to be being assaulted or organized in such a location
Against such organised crime, "Maharashtra Slum Goons," if the type of crime is found.
Handloommen, drug offenders, dangerous persons and their subversive acts.
Action should be taken under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1981.
6) Terms and conditions in the environmental permit as well as the environment by the tenderer / licensee.
It will be mandatory to comply with the provision of the relevant rules. Violation of this provision
If so, they are liable for action under the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
will remain.
Case No.6
I] Amount of ownership: -
Ownership Amount Government Notification Revenue & Forest Department No.
10/0220 Q. No.39 / B-2 dated 04.06.2021 for the Mumbai Metropolitan Region
1200 / - per brass (Rs.267 / - per metric ton) and other than Mumbai Metropolitan Region.
An amount of Rs.600 / - per brass (Rs.133 / - per tonne) will be admissible for the area. In this
The reforms made by the government from time to time should be implemented as per the norms.
23 out of 31 pages
# Page 24
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
II] Household Beneficiaries: - 5 Brass (22.50 Merrick Tonnes) to eligible household beneficiaries of Government Scheme
Sand should be made available free of cost.
III] Price of sale of sand / sand: -
Do not profit or lose by including the following factors when determining the dry sales rate for customers.
The selling price of sand is being fixed on the basis of: -
1) Sand mining from river / basin, transportation of sand to depots, creation and management of depots.
Received in the tender to be published by the Depot in the respective district.
The final bid rate. (Including GST)
2) The amount of ownership.
3) District Mineral Trust Fund, environmental charges levied by the Government and
Fees / taxes, etc., as per the rules.
4) The cost of transporting sand from the sand depot will have to be borne by the customer.
IV] Sale of seized sand / sand: -
a) If the vehicle is caught while being transported by illegal excavation, the sand from that vehicle is seized.
The sand should be weighed and stored in a depot near the place where the vehicle was seized.
It should be separately recorded on the Great Fire system.
b) Seized sand if the sand is stored by illegal excavation.
Out of the stock, priority will be given to the economically backward sections under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana.
The list submitted by the competent authority for the houses of the beneficiaries shall be submitted by the Tehsildar concerned.
Not more than 5 Brasses to the beneficiaries in the final approved list after verification by them.
Sand should be made available free of cost on priority.
If the distance between the seized sand stock and the beneficiary's house is large, the beneficiary is forfeited.
Auction of seized sand stock if not ready to carry sand / sands
in the tender for the sand depots functioning near the seized sand stock which
rate has been obtained. It should be taken as the price per hand.
Case No.7
Preventive measures: -
The concerned Divisional Commissioner / s shall ensure that there is no illegal mining and transportation of sand.
The Collector shall take action as follows: -
1) There should be a single road for the transportation of sand in each of the sand dunes.
2) Ma. Government issued by order of the High Court dated 14/09/2023
Decision Revenue & Forest Department No. Gaukani - 10/1222 Q. No.82 / B-1 dated 27.09.2023
The provisions contained therein are as follows and shall be dealt with as follows: -
a.CCTV cameras having memory card / Chip, must mandatorily be installed
in all the vehicles used for transporting sand from sand block / creek blocks
24 out of 31 pages
# Page 25
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
to sand depot. Vehicle without such CCTV camera/ having cameras but not
in working condition, shall not be used/ permitted for transporting the sand
from sand block / creek blocks to sand depot. The CCTV cameras should
so installed / fitted that it will be able to clearly capture and monitor the
entire trolley of the vehicle transporting the sand and the registration
number of the vehicle shall be noted in / written on in the camera. Even
recording in the camera should reflect the vehicle number. The camera
should also capture / video record the route through which
the said vehicle passes. The CCTV camera has to be connected directly to
the control room / main server, which would be directly under supervision
of concerned Tahsildar. Further the memory disc containing the recording
of the said transportations should mandatorily be submitted to the office of
The Tahsildar every 15 days for the preceding 15 days period.
b. The concerned Tahsildar should at all times be in position to monitor the
vehicles carrying the sand from sand blocks to sand depot; and if it is found
that there is an unusual stoppage of vehicle including stoppage for illegal
removal of sand or diversion of the vehicle from the regular path, the
Tahsildar or his/her subordinate officers must immediately track/intercept
the said vehicle and if required, initiate action provided under law the
The current government resolution is dated 19/04/2023.
c..If it is found that, i) the concerned vehicle driver does not have a valid ETP
or vehicle pass including barcode, the excavation should be considered as
illegal / the transport as illegal, and ii) illegal excavation or illegal
transportation is done, in both these cases, action should be initiated
against the driver and the contractor under section 48 (7) (8) of the
Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966, and also the tender provided to
the contractor should be cancelled and the E.M.D. should be forfeited. The
Driver of the vehicle shall always carry a valid driving license and also his
aadhar card. The cleaner/ helper if any, on the vehicle shall always carry his
aadhar card.
d.In addition to what has been provided under the Government Resolution
dated 19/04/2023, it should be made mandatory to preserve the data
regarding the Tare weight of each vehicle authorized to transport sand from
Ghat to depot and every time the vehicle enters the depot, actual weight of
the vehicle when loaded shall be recorded and date preserved.
e. Continued in line with the revised Sub-Saharan Sand Policy issued by the Government.
for the sand depot. to act in accordance with the above order of the High Court.
25 out of 31 pages
# Page 26
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
Care should be taken. Also, all that is currently published and will be published in the future
In the bids. to act in accordance with the aforesaid order of the High Court.
Be sure to state that it is binding and be careful to act accordingly.
3) Installation of CCTV cameras in sand dunes:
a. By tender holder for 24/7 photography at each sand dune site
CCTVs should be installed. At least one of these CCTV cameras is located where the sand
to be installed at the filling point and to transport the sand from the sand block
All the vehicles are from the place where they come and go in the village.
to be used for photography. CCTV installed in the sand dunes
The price will have to be borne by the bidders. Also not tendered
Traffic from places to avoid illegal transportation of sand from sand blocks
CCTV cameras should be installed in such places as well.
Action to be taken on the availability of funds from the District Planning Committee
should be done.
b. Address of CCTV installed by the tenderers Collector / Divisional Commissioner
And it will have to be given to the revenue and forest department of the government. sand by the tenderer
Tehsildar CD with photograph of excavation and transportation every 15 days
Deposits to the office will be mandatory.
c. The Tahsildar takes the photograph in this CD through his subordinate system.
Check it out. The Tehsildar and Sub Divisional Officer concerned shall, from time to time,
Such a photograph should also be checked.
4) Every village labourer taluka shall regularly visit the sand block / sand depots in its jurisdiction.
A visit will be required. For this, the Tehsildar attests to the tenderer concerned.
It will also be mandatory to keep the gift made. Talathi visits Sand Group / Sand Depots
After this, it should be recorded in the daily visit book and signed on a date.
5) The concerned Circle Officer shall also regularly visit the Sand Block / Sand Depot in his / her jurisdiction.
After inspection, it should be recorded in the said daily visit book and signed on the date.
6) The Tehsildar, Sub-Divisional Officer and Additional Collector concerned in their respective areas.
By making casual visits to the sand club / sand depot from time to time and recording their daily visits,
The date must be signed.
7) The provisions of this Government Decision as well as the The High Court dated 14.09.2023
Sand mining, transportation, depot creation and management are carried out as per the given orders.
Or a team at the government level to look into the matter and conduct a surprise inspection.
should be done.
8) The following should be observed by the officers while inspecting the sand dunes: -
a. the sand excavated from the start of the excavation to the date of inspection;
The sand deposits at the excavation site during the day of measurement and inspection.
26 out of 31 pages
# Page 27
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
b. if there is a bridge in the river basin, then around the bridge as well as around the bench mark and
Checking whether or not sand is being mined below the benchmarks
It should be visited and recorded.
c. prepared for excavation in the adjacent area near the river bank
Included in the mining plan and the environmental clearance received accordingly.
Excavation should be carried out according to the conditions made.
9) The above standards of inspection are being strictly adhered to by the District Collector or
Be sure to find out how. Illegal sand in an officer's jurisdiction even after inspection
Invalidation of the concerned officer if it is determined that the excavation / transportation is going on uninterruptedly.
against the concerned assuming connivance with the excavator / transporter
A proposal for disciplinary action should be submitted to the government through the Divisional Commissioner.
Case No.8
1) The control
a) To be issued from time to time by the Central Government / State Government for transportation of sand.
It will be mandatory to use the sun-control procedure as per the forthcoming directions. as well as
With a view to effectively curb illegal mining / transportation of sand, the said
The use of a computer system called a fireplace in addition to the control process.
It will be mandatory.
b) To enable effective control of illegal mining / transportation of minor mineral;
For this, police at tehsil, sub-division, district and divisional level,
Officers / Staff of Transport Department and Revenue Officers / Staff.
Separate Inspection / Vigilance Teams Additional Collector / Collector and Divisional
The Commissioner must create. The teams carried out illegal excavations in their premises.
And it will be the collective responsibility of this team to stop the traffic.
c) The revenue arising out of the incident or case of illegal mining / transportation of minor mineral.
The officer / employee will be exposed to the jurisdiction of the officer / employee.
Whether they are responsible in this case should be thoroughly investigated.
The local authorities / staff concerned in the investigation intending to conduct illegal excavations:
were found to be negligent or on illegal excavation / transportation by them.
officers / employees if they are found to have not been adequately controlled.
disciplinary action under the rules in force against them, fixing responsibility for
Action should be taken.
2) Monthly report of excavation and sale -
What is the total number of sand dunes in each district, out of which how many are sand dunes?
Tenders were floated and how many sandbags were not tendered from these sandbars?
27 out of 31 pages
# Page 28
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
How many metric tons of sand were mined each month and the sand in the depot
sales, as well as how many cases of illegal mining in the district each month
exposed and in how many cases were the accused charged,
Monthly Report in this regard to the Government by the Additional Collector / Collector and
Submit to the Director, Directorate of Geology and Mines.
Case No.9
Suggestions regarding work to be done from the District Mineral Trust Fund: -
The Central Government enacted the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015.
In section 9 (b), the State Government by notification, may, in every district affected by mining,
A provision has been made to set up a mineral estate. According to the Government Notification, Industry, Energy
and Labour Department No. MDF 0615/51 Q. No.34 / Udyog-9, dated 01.09.2016,
Other measures to enhance the environmental quality of the mining district are permitted.
Expenditure on environmental matters should be met from the existing funds.
Subordinate Mineral Tenants of all types by establishing District Mineral Trusts,
The ownership amount to be deposited by the licensee as well as the sand tenderer with the government.
Decided to take 10% of the amount as contribution to the District Mineral Trust.
It has come. From this fund, the fund guides for roads, health, etc. in the Gram Panchayat area.
It is paid according to the instructions.
Government Notification, Department of Industries, Power and Labour, No. MDF MDF
0615/51 Q.34 / Udyog-9, dated 01.09.2016, in the District Mineral Trust Fund
Administrative or establishment expenses not exceeding 5% of the amount accrued.
It can be spent to make ends meet. Subject to this limitation, the said fund shall be used for the following:
Expenses may be incurred as required: -
1) To take necessary measures to prevent illegal excavation and transportation.
2) To move the seized vehicle to a safer location if it is in a locked position.
to take measures.
3) To protect the seized sand deposits and to protect the area authorities.
Appointment of security guards.
4) Hiring of private vehicles for vigilance and surveillance team.
5) Innovative for estimating sand availability, supervision and control of sand mining.
Developing projects / technologies.
28 out of 31 pages
# Page 29
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
Case No.10
District Level Grievance Redressal Committee on Difficulties and Grievances in Sand / Sand Mining
The difficulties faced by the bidder for sand mining from the tendered sand / sand blocks and
Environmental complaints about sand mining from various individuals and organisations are also reported.
The district-level sand control committee will look after the work.
1) The sand is quarried from the sand / sand site in violation of the terms / conditions of the tender, illegal /
Regular sand mining has adversely affected the drinking and agricultural water of the riverside villages.
As a result, sand traffic causes damage to riverside agriculture / roads, such as
If complaints in the form of complaints are received from various individuals and organizations, the Tahsildar of such complaint
They should investigate and submit a report to the district level committee. Sadar
The report will have to be decided by the district-level committee within 15 days.
2) If the bidder faces any difficulty / hindrance in sand mining or
Due to local opposition to sand mining by the bidder or his / her
If the sand cannot be excavated due to an out-of-control and natural force majeure
The tenderer should immediately apply to the district level committee. Here's how to get a written application
If so, the committee shall visit such sand / sand sites physically and identify the sand / sand site.
Re: Conduct an inspection, as well as a local investigation into other issues in the complaint, and
Discussing the same in the committee meeting, sand extraction from the respective sand / sand blocks.
An appropriate decision should be taken within 15 days regarding the continuation or closure of the same and that decision should be taken
Inform the respective tenderers, complainants, and area revenue officials. at the district level
The committee should take care of video recording during the survey of the sand dunes.
3) A complainant who does not agree with the decision taken by the Committee with respect to his complaint,
The complainant can appeal to the concerned Divisional Commissioner in this regard. the respective departmental
The Commissioner shall, in any event, reconsider the decision taken by the District Level Committee.
Decisions will be made within 15 days. The decision was taken by the complainant and the district collector concerned.
They will be notified.
4) The said Committee shall inquire into the complaint received in respect of sand mining as aforesaid.
The group of sand in which the decision has been made to stop sand mining
The contract entered into with the tenderer should be cancelled forthwith.
Government issued earlier in respect of or in connection with sand / sand release
Decisions, Orders, Notices issued under Government Memorandum, Government Circular or Government Letter
If these Governments are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this judgment, in such a case, this Government
The provisions of the judgment should be treated as final and acted upon accordingly.
J Sand Depots as provided in the Government Decision dated 19/04/2023 earlier
Those sand depots which have become operational will continue to remain so, however, for these sand depots.
The terms and conditions of the revised sand policy will continue to apply. As well as the government's decision
29 out of 31 pages
# Page 30
GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION NO. GOCKHANI - 10/1123 Q.No.75 / B-1
The date of sale of sand / sand in Section No. 6 (III) of this revised policy.
A price has to be paid.
Power to issue necessary guidelines for the implementation of this Policy.
Government / Department will remain.
Cost, Demand No. C-01, Main Account Head 2853 Non-ferrous Mines
and Metallurgical Industry, 02 Regulation and Development of Mines 102 - Mineral Exploration (00) (01)
06-Industry and Metals 00-Industry and Metals (0) (Datamat) Sand mining, storage and
The transportation as well as the cost of the tender to be released for the sand depots in the state.
be subtracted from the approved grants available under the head of accounts. The plan
Computer Index No. It is 28530188.
This Government Decision shall come into force on the date of its issue.
This Government Decision, Informal Reference Number of the Department of Finance - 397/2023
/ Expenditure - being issued with the consent received under 05/12/2023 dated 9.
The decision was taken by the Government of Maharashtra.
# Page 31