# Page 1
the Government as well as the Revenue Officer / Authority
Regarding the handling of quasi-judicial cases filed
To ensure compliance
"Standard Operating"
about determining the procedure (SOP).
Government of Maharashtra
Revenue and Forest Department
Government Decision Number: Land-2025 / Q. No.132 / Land-01A
Madam Cama Marg, Martyr Rajguru Chowk,
1st Floor Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400032
Date: May 14, 2026
Read on
1.महस Department of Forest and Climate Change, Government Decision No: S - 30/2015 Q. No.299 / J-1,
d. 17.12.2015
2.महस Department of Forest and Climate Change, Government Decision No: Land-2016 / Q. No.201 / J-1,
d. 01.07.2016
3.महस Department of Forest and Climate Change, Government Decision No: Land-2019 / Q.No.179 / J-1A,
d. 13.09.2019
4.महस Department of Forest and Climate Change, Government Decision No: JUDGMENT-2021 / Q. No.116 / J-1A,
d. 18.01.2022
5.महस Department of Forest and Climate Change, Government Circular No: JUDGES-2022 / Q. 86 / J-1A,
d. 29.06.2022
6.महस Department of Forest and Climate Change, Government Letter No. Land-2023 / No.135 / J-1A, D. 13.02.2024
7.महस Department of Forest and Climate Change, S.No. Work Plan-2025 / P.No. 06 / M-8, D. 09.04.2025
Proposal
Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 and other Land Reforms / Land Matters
Under the Act as well as under various Acts to be dealt with by the Revenue and Forest Department,
The Maharashtra Habitat and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 and applicable to Marathwada and Vidarbha divisions.
Clan Act, Indian Civil Protection Code, 2023, Maharashtra Private Forests (Edit)
Act, The Senior Citizens Act, 2007, The Rent Control Act, 1999, Miscellaneous Incentives and Incentives
At the level of Additional Collector and Divisional Commissioner under the Laws, Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
Arbitration Cases, Maharashtra Municipalities, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Towns Act, 1965,
1
# Page 2
The Gram Panchayats Act, 1958, the Maharashtra Local Authorities Disqualification of Members Act, 1986
etc., passed by the Regional Revenue Officer / Authority with respect to the subject matter to be dealt with.
the Revenue Officer / Authority from the citizens in accordance with the orders to be made, as well as
Appeals or review / review applications are filed with the government. such an appeal, and
Review / review applications are handled as quasi-judicial cases at the government level.
In this regard, section twelve and section thirteen of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966, and
The Maharashtra Land Revenue (Procedure of Revenue Officers) Rules, 1967 and the Maharashtra Land
To make self-explanatory provisions in the Revenue (Appeals, Review and Review) Rules, 1967.
have arrived.
The Presiding Officer in quasi-judicial business has to perform his duties and responsibilities.
Lack of awareness of these, non-compliance with natural justice, facts / circumstances of the case, and
Without regard to statutory provisions and without due diligence (without application).
of mind) Passing of arbitrary judgments, delay in filing of applications / appeals
Pardon of delay without sufficient cause, lack of in-depth knowledge of the relevant Act, quasi-judicial
Not Scrutinising the Application / Appeal while Filing, Passing of Judgment without Jurisdiction
Serious loopholes in quasi-judicial procedure such as doing etc. have been pointed out.
Faster functioning by improving quasi-judicial functions of revenue officers.
The government is considering measures to improve the quality of the results.
In the past, various government decisions have provided guidelines on quasi-judicial work.
have arrived. All of these government decisions, ma. The High Court, Mumbai, Md. the Supreme Court,
Balance of suggestions at the field level and recommendations made by the Divisional Commissioner, Pune
The Government shall, in principle, reform the quasi-judicial functions and procedures as follows:
There is a purpose.
1) The procedure / procedure of the cases being dealt with in quasi-judicial cases.
to simplify.
2
# Page 3
2) Modern for numerical and qualitative settlement of quasi-judicial cases.
the use of technology.
3) Revenue for expediting the process of adjudication in quasi-judicial cases.
To conduct regular training for capacity building of officers.
4) Effective implementation of the order in the quasi-judicial case within the stipulated time.
Determining the procedure for doing so.
5) To increase transparency and accountability in quasi-judicial processes.
to take measures.
6) Information and guidance for citizens participating in quasi-judicial proceedings.
easily accessible.
7) By making the revenue officers aware of the responsibilities of quasi-judicial procedure.
to give.
8) Natural Jurisdictions in quasi-judicial proceedings with the Revenue Officer.
Orders with strict compliance, transparency, speed, and quality factoring.
to achieve the goal.
The Government's Decision
The quasi-judicial process is based on natural justice. Natural justice is human.
A judicial process based on morality, temperament, and general rights, to which either party is entitled.
Protects against prejudice, arbitrariness, or injustice, and goes beyond the complexity of the law.
Guarantees a hearing. The following are the main principles of natural justice.
A. Impartiality, or lack of bias / bias, interests, or prejudices Contaminated attitudes
The lack of them.
B. To give the opposition a chance to be heard / to listen to the parties on both sides.
C. Reasoned Orders or Rational Orders.
Revenue Division, Mandal Officer, Naib Tehsildar, Tehsildar,
Sub-Divisional Officer / Deputy Collector, Additional Collector, Collector, Divisional
Commissioner level Additional Commissioner and Divisional Commissioner under various Acts.
Semi-judicial cases have to be handled. However, the quasi-judicial process as well as the changing circumstances
Due to insufficient understanding of modern technology, quasi-judicial cases are disposed of expeditiously.
It doesn't happen fast. The quality of quasi-judicial decisions passed is also satisfactory.
3
# Page 4
As to not having. The High Court and M. The Supreme Court expressed dissatisfaction from time to time
It is, therefore, against the decisions of many quasi-judicial processes. writ in the High Court
The challenge is made through a petition. Transparency in the conduct of quasi-judicial proceedings
From the point of view of quantitative and qualitative enhancement of the order to be passed by extension.
Standards to ensure procedures to be followed in dealing with quasi-judicial cases.
The matter of fixing the modalities was under the consideration of the government. Maharashtra Land Revenue
Under Section 5 of the Act, 1966, all revenue relating to the State Government
There is superintendence, direction and control over matters. The above mentioned in quasi-judicial proceedings
Pursuant to the Preamble, under Section 5 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Act, 1966,
The following instructions / directions are being given through the standard operating procedure.
1) Filing and Scrutiny of Application / Appeal - Original application in quasi-judicial case,
Review, review petition or appeal petition to the quasi-judicial authority concerned.
or to the Superintendent of his office (Tehsildar - who handles the record of rights).
Naib Tehsildar / Sub-Divisional Officer - Naib Tehsildar (Shirstadar / Peshkar),
Additional Collector - Deputy Tehsildar in the Kulwahiwat / Land Reforms Branch or
Senior Grade Short Writer) on office days from S. 11.00 to D. Arrive before 4: 00 p.m.
should be done. The same day, the government scrutinised the cases filed.
Based on the points provided in the attachment with the decision, the office is completed by the Superintendent.
To record cases which are complete in the e-QJ Court system.
be. Which quasi-judicial cases may not meet the criteria in the Scrutiny Annex.
Necessary error reports should be given to the concerned. imperfect in any case.
Applications / appeals should not be filed.
2) Verification and Affidavit - At the bottom of each application and appeal memorandum
Verification should be done according to the given attachment - two. as well as instrumental verification.
4
# Page 5
The person making the statement has given a separate affidavit along with the page of his / her statement.
As per Annexure-III, each application and appeal should be submitted along with a memorandum.
3) Issue of notice - relating to the Act under which the application / appeal is filed
The Act provides for the procedure for the issue of notice, as follows:
Action should be taken to issue notices to the concerned. However, the Act in which the notice
Sections of the Revenue Code where no provision has been made for enforcement
Action should be taken to issue a notice in the form of 230. Maharashtra General Assembly
Under the meaning of section 28 of the Act, 1904, a notice to be sent by post is
- Sending by registered postal delivery payment (RPAD). However, the Department of Posts
The postal delivery service registered with 01.09.2025 has been discontinued.
The merger has been done in - Speed Post. Therefore, wherever
Registered mail delivery payment will be mentioned as - at-Speed
The post should be perceived as such and sent as such by notice-speed post.
Further, on the request of the applicant / appellant, the quasi-judicial authority shall
Notices issued for the presence of non-creditors / in-charge / respondent
In addition, notices may be issued. In order to issue such a notice,
A copy of the notice with the signature and seal of the quasi-judicial authority,
will be given to the applicant / appellant for execution. by the applicant / appellant
After the notice is served, an affidavit will be required to be submitted. each one of them
It is the responsibility of the applicant / appellant to provide the addresses of the parties on the application / appeal memo.
For any other reason, the address of the jabadar is available in the usual manner.
In the absence of this, an alternate notice may be served upon confirmation that it is not possible to issue the notice.
Under Rule 20 (1A) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 Order V,
where the incumbent / non-accountee / respondent was directly and voluntarily residing immediately before or
He is known to have run a business or to have worked personally to earn a living.
5
# Page 6
Published and published in a daily newspaper that is consumed in such local areas.
Come.
4) Proceedings on Deferred Application - Beyond the time limit prescribed for filing the application / appeal
Separate application for waiver of delay with original application if there has been an extended period of time.
The filing must be made by the party and the presiding officer regarding the first delay waiver.
A decision has to be made. Detailed Reason for the Delay Waiver Decision
It is necessary to mention in the separate judgment sheet. Delay waiver verdict
Separate orders should be passed for this not to be mentioned on the routine. Term
The 1963 Act does not apply to quasi-judicial proceedings. Regarding the waiver of the delay
The quasi-judicial authority or quasi-judicial tribunal is exempted from delay as in the case of the court.
There are no inherent rights to do so. The Act provides for waiver of delay if
provided or if the provisions of the Terms Act, 1963 have been applied
It is necessary to make a decision about the waiver of the delay.
A. Section 251 of the Revenue Code provides for waiver of delays.
There are.
According to Section 79 of the Maharashtra Habitat and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948,
The provisions of the Term Act, 1963 were invoked for the purpose of remission of delays.
There are.
c. Maharashtra Stamp Act Q. Provisions in the Act regarding waiver of late
No. Also, the Term Act 1963 has not been enacted. Therefore, the
Ordered to file an application / appeal within the time limit.
The Act under which the provision regarding waiver of delay in filing of application or appeal is made /
Decision on application / appeal only after taking into account whether provision has been made
Take it.
5) Removal or filing of the names of the parties / proceedings on the intervention application -
Application from / on behalf of a third party / person or rights, Revenue 6
# Page 7
the officer, inappropriately naming a party / person, in the application / appeal case
If included, it can be removed. Involved in the application / appeal case
An interest in effectively and thoroughly identifying all questions.
If the person is required to be admitted as a party, such
Include the person as a party. Admitting a person as a party
By making corrections to the application / appeal notice, if any, as may be prescribed.
Issue of notice and copy of application / appeal memorandum to the respondent / non-appellant
Come.
6) Hearing of cases - All revenue officers hear quasi-judicial cases.
It should be taken at least twice a week. Tuesday and Friday, or
Set weekly market days. Tehsil-wise, Sub-Division-wise fixed
The District Collector has ordered that the date of the hearing be fixed.
Issue and publish on the district website. the Regional Revenue Officer
In quasi-judicial cases, the proceedings are repeatedly adjourned.
It has been decided. Henceforth, a written reason can only be given if the party has shown sufficient reason.
The hearing process can be postponed a maximum of once by mentioning.
Due to circumstances outside the party's control, such as
It is possible to get a hearing only because of serious illness, natural disasters, etc.
No, the hearing can only be adjourned at such a time. It has also been postponed
The case will be heard in the next first week or at most the second.
It should be kept for a week. Also, the trial proceedings should be held in a chronological order.
7) Procedure - Government Decision No.S- 30/2015 Q. No.299 / J-1 of this Department,
d. Directions in 17.12.2015 and ma. Smt. Savitri of the High Court of Bombay
Chandrakesh Pal Viruddham Maharashtra Government, Writ Petition No. 4101/2007, Part I
d. Paragraph No. in 24.03.2009. In accordance with the guidelines set out in section 17,
A quasi-judicial procedure needs to be implemented.
7
# Page 8
(1) Appeal, review / revision application and any other application.
under which Act and under which provisions,
This should be clearly stated.
(2) Appeal by the appellant / applicant, review / revision application and others.
Submit a summary of brief dates and events with any application.
Do it.
(3) Appeals, review / revision applications and any other application, which
The order / decision has been challenged, it has been received
From the date / cause of dispute, applicable to the subject concerned
It must be filed within the time limit prescribed by law. Delay
If so, it will only be accepted with a late waiver application.
(4) Submission of appeal, review / revision application and any other application.
In doing so, it is necessary if the applicant is applying on his or her own
Proof of identity through documents or authorized by him.
Filing an application / appeal memorandum through a representative or lawyer
Do it.
(5) For each non-applicant / assessee with application / appeal.
There should be sufficient copies and for the authority / Presiding
Two additional copies should also be provided for the officer.
(6) To issue notice to the non-creditor / payee, as the case may be.
Postal charges or postage stamp separately with application / appeal application
It is necessary to give with an envelope.
(7) Notice by the Authority / Presiding Officer
In addition to issuing, the appellant / applicant, registered post
Additional copies by delivery payment (RPAD) / speed post post
Can send separately and service with proof of shipment 8.
# Page 9
An affidavit can be filed. by the Postal Authority
If the service is run, the only service is postal receipt and delivery.
Proof of execution will be considered.
(8) Suspension, injunction / other interim orders or directions.
The urgent need to seek interim relief like etc.
If so, the application should state a specific reason for the urgency.
Presiding Officer to the Opposition in case of emergency
Delivering registered mail with a notice of opportunity to submit
Payment (RPAD) will be notified immediately by post.
(9) If there is a real urgent need, the relevant
For reasons to be noted by the Authority / Presiding Officer only
Unilateral Interim / Temporary for a specified period of time
Orders / reliefs may be given. Immediate Interim for Applicants
Explanation as to whether the order / stay order was required
And the reasons must be mentioned in the order. The interim
The order shall be for a specified period only and in this order only, the interim
Whether or not the order is required to continue
Mentioned the time of the hearing to hear the opposition
will go. If such party has an early hearing or an interim
Continuation of relief or appeal, reconsideration or review.
The service rendered by the appellant / applicant, if required.
An affidavit / postal rack report should be filed. The one-sided
Delivering registered mail to the opposition with an order of specified duration.
Payment (RPAD) will be intimated by post / speed post.
9
# Page 10
(10) The Competent Authority to the applicant / appellant / non-appellant / assessee
Notify the next date, time, and place of the hearing and
If possible, the hearing will take place on that date and time of the hearing.
(11) At the time of hearing, the officer concerned in each division shall
be asked to attend and he / she shall be
The authority / presiding officer should assist in the case.
(12) From the date of receipt of the notice and of the actual hearing.
A reasonable amount of time should be given before the date. If any of the parties is sufficient
If, for any reason, he is unable to attend the hearing, such
The party should be given another chance for a hearing.
(13) The Authority hearing quasi-judicial cases / Presiding
the date, time and place appropriate for the officer to hold such hearing.
will be determined. any third party during the hearing of such authority.
will not communicate with the party in person or over the phone or any such
will not commit an act that would affect the hearing of the defendant, or
It will be affected.
(14) as soon as practicable after the completion of the hearing and
If possible, a maximum of eight from the completion of the hearing.
Within weeks, the records before the authority as well as
Based on the statements made at the hearing, the case was heard.
The executing authority / presiding officer passes the reasoned order
will. If the order states reasons in support of the order
It should be.
(15) any information after the completion of the hearing by the Authority or
will not accept documents, or any such documents, or
will not pass a reasoned order based on the information, unless 10
# Page 11
such material in accordance with the rules of natural justice of the parties to the proceedings.
It is not noticed.
(16) An order on a hearing by a quasi-judicial authority to all parties
Immediate Registered Postal Delivery Payment (RPAD) by post / speed
will be notified by post.
(17) The order on hearing by the quasi-judicial authority is digital.
To be filled / uploaded on eqjcourt website with signature
Do it.
(18) Political activist, Member of Legislative Assembly, Member of Parliament or
Any application, request, or prayer from a third party
shall not be admissible in quasi-judicial proceedings, unless
The person will not be a party, defendant, or interlocutor in the proceedings.
(19) The order promulgated shall be communicated immediately to the parties.
(20) Detail of the hearing carefully in a separate routine.
will be kept.
(21) The relevant authorities / laws assisting the Authority.
The assistant's records contain only references and legal provisions.
Judgments will also be included.
(22) The records made by the law officer / concerned authorities of the order.
should not be in form.
8) Concept of Structure of Judgment - Decisions to be passed in quasi-judicial cases /
There has to be a similarity between the commands, the structure concept. revenue for it.
The structure concept of the officer's judgments must be as follows: -
1) Information on the application / appeal - including the name and designation of the presiding officer,
Case No., Names of the Applicant and Jabdar / Appellant and Respondent
11
# Page 12
Names, date of filing of case and date of declaration of result,
Details of the law and section under which the case has been decided.
should be mentioned.
2) A brief background to the case
3) Brief written submissions / arguments by the applicant / appellant
4) Brief written submissions / arguments by the respondent / respondent.
(v) the grounds for deciding the application / appeal; and
Legal issues
6) Provided in accordance with the settled dispute
Reason / Explanation
7) Functional orders.
8) Functional order contains the time limit for challenging the order and the appeal.
the designation of the court.
Statement of the applicant / respondent, appellant / respondent - statement of the parties / in writing
Summary and in writing, without mentioning in the Argument Verdict Verbatim / as the case may be.
Mention the essence of the saying / argument.
Arbitration - Arguments submitted by both parties to decide the case.
In making a written statement / affidavit, a document submitted by both parties.
to come up with an important statement, whether material or legal.
Arguments arise when the party's assertions are denied by the other party. Important
A statement that the applicant / appellant has the right to apply / appeal.
An accusation made to show or to defend by the defendant / respondent.
Allegations and their legal and factual statements. A strong statement by one of the parties
Every important statement made and denied by the other party is a separate argument.
Similarly, determining the issue by verifying that there is a difference of opinion on the issue, or
to decide.
12
# Page 13
Reasoning - on each of the arguments determined for the determination of the case.
A combined or combined explanation must be given. of the evidence submitted / in writing.
In line with the statement, the dispute decided upon is decided with a reason.
It is necessary to register. The argumentative reasoning should be consistent and rational. the two of them
Submission of Judgments of various Courts by the parties with respect to their claim / demand
the same number of judgments, if any, as in quasi-judicial cases; and
The fairness of the same should be mentioned in the judgment.
9) Issue of orders by digital signature - Final decision in quasi-judicial case,
Decisions on deferment, deferment, and all other decisions are digital.
Must be issued by signature. The Information Technology Act, 2000 and Information Technology
Indian Evidence Act with Sections 2 (1) (p), 3, 3A and 5 of the (Amendment) Act, 2008
As per Section 73 of 2023, a document / record certified by a digital signature is a proof.
Therefore, it is accepted that every decision should be issued with a digital signature.
10) Interim order / stay order - the Act under which the application / appeal is filed.
Provisions / Provisions with respect to grant of interim order / stay order under that Act.
It's necessary. If there is a provision under the Act for giving an interim order / stay order
If not, the decision of the following authority / presiding officer may be stayed.
No or no interim orders can be passed in such a case. Mrs. Indira
In the West Bengal government's case against Devi, Md. The High Court, Calcutta
It is clarified that quasi-judicial courts have a civil procedure similar to a civil court.
There are no built-in rights as per Section 151 of the Code. Against the MorganstanlMutualFund
Karthikadasa (1994) 4 SCC225 v. The Supreme Court has made it clear
That, quasi-judicial authorities e.g. Customer forums etc. are built like a civil court.
There are no rights. The powers conferred on quasi-judicial authorities are those relating to
are provided under the Act.
13
# Page 14
It is only if the person has expressly conferred the inherent rights under the relevant Act.
can be used. Therefore, the act under which quasi-judicial proceedings are taking place
Ensure that there are provisions for issuing interim orders / stay orders under the Act.
required to be done. e.g. as per Section 256 (3) of the Revenue Code as well as Maharashtra
Bombay Land Revenue Code with Section 74 (2) of the Habitat and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948
Suspension of enforcement of the judgment of the following quasi-judicial authority under section 210:
There are provisions regarding the right to pay.
The Hon'ble High Court, Bombay, in Lokmanya Nagar Priyadarshini and Others v.
Government of Maharashtra, Writ Petition No. 6158/2006 d. Given on 24.11.2006
As per the judgment, what are the specific criteria to be followed while passing an interim stay order?
Criteria are given.
A. The first instance
B. Balance of comfort / convenience
C. Irreparable damage.
a) Prima facie case - A prima facie case is a question of importance and is complete.
The hearing must take place and the applicant must be judged at the end of the hearing on the basis of the evidence presented.
There is a possibility of getting relief. There is an important / substantive question that is honestly
has been presented and needs to be examined. The request made by the applicant
It is not frivolous or hot. as early as possible for the party to prove his claim.
Evidence has been presented, which makes it imperative to investigate the case.
b) Balance of Convenience / Facility - If Prohibition Order / Stay Order is passed or
To assess which party will suffer the most if rejected.
This is to ensure a balance of comfort / convenience. If no restraining order / standing order is given
So how much damage will be done to the applicant / appellant and if the injunction / stay order
It is a comparative study of the extent of loss to the responsible / liable if paid.
14
# Page 15
It is the balancing of facilities. The applicant's loss if the deferral is denied
Money cannot compensate. For example, property. If a stay order is issued, the debtor's
The loss can be easily compensated with money.
C. Unlimited Loss - Unlimited loss is the amount of money after the hearing.
Damages will not be compensated. Damage caused without the immediate intervention of the court
Cannot be stopped and cannot be replenished with money. The financial loss
Cannot be measured. Damage cannot be undone. For example, the destruction of a historic building.
Disclosure of trade secrets, loss of business reputation, sale of property to third parties.
11) Repeal - in all Acts, the order appealed against to the appellate authority.
Orders can be cancelled, retained, changed, or rotated. as well as
the lower authority to inquire further or to obtain such further evidence.
/ The authority against whose order an appeal / review petition has been filed.
Directions may be given or appropriate directions may be given to bring the matter to a conclusion.
can be sent back. (To re-investigate the case). to settle the case.
When sending back / re-sending, the command that is challenged is cancelled first.
It needs to be done. to refer the case back to the Inquiry without revoking the challenged order.
Don't come. Obtaining more evidence on issues that were not considered in the original proceedings
/ Points that need to be considered must be mentioned in the case when sending it back.
e.g. passing of orders without complying with natural justice, filing of appeal / application
Ruling on the merits of the case without condoning the delay in doing so, etc.
12) Jurisdiction: To the Revenue Officer concerned to decide on a quasi-judicial matter.
the provisions of the relevant Act or the authority delegated to the authority
Powers of the Commissioner Notification / Rules / Government Decisions / Orders / Circulars, if any.
A clear mention should be made at the beginning of the judgment sheet. Section 13 (1) of the Revenue Code
By the proviso to this Act, if the State Government, by general or special order,
15
# Page 16
The powers of the Collector are the same as those delegated to the Tahsildar.
Tehsildars can be used. as well as other revenue officers of the District Collectors.
of the notification / Government if made by the Commissioner under the Act.
The decision / circular, etc. should be mentioned.
Under Section 252 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Act, 1966, under Section 251
The bill must have been filed after the deadline; for review or reassessment.
The application filed has been denied; or the application for adjournment of proceedings
No appeal can be made against an order granting or refusing. clause
The government has the power to issue refunds under section 259, including 257.
13) Minor mining cases - Maharashtra land in respect of unauthorised mining of minor mines.
Under Section 48 of the Revenue Act, 1966, a penal order is a minor mine.
The dimensions are based on measurements and panchnama. However, the measurement of the quantity of minor mines and
The panchnama is done in a faulty manner and the punitive orders passed by it are superfluous.
They do not survive in the authorities and in the courts. The following steps can be taken to avoid these issues:
Adoption is required.
1) With section 23-B of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
Rule 80 (1) of the Maharashtra Minor Mines Exploration (Development and Regulation) Rules, 2013
According to the notification, the search and seizure of unauthorised under-recoveries shall be carried out by the competent authorities.
In this regard, Section 103 of the Indian Civil Protection Code, 2023 (formerly Criminal
Action is required under Section 100 of the Code of Procedure, 1973). as well as
Measurement of unauthorized mining, implemented by Collector Parbhani.
According to the procedure, it should be done by drone as much as possible.
2) Revenue & Forest Department, Government Circular No.: GOCHANI 10/0316 Q. No.204 / B
Submineral Exploration, Dimensions as per Circular dated 14.06.2017
The measurement and panchnama are done in the presence of the person / representative of the excavator concerned.
should be done. Attendance notices should be given to the concerned in advance.
16
# Page 17
3) The excavator concerned on the quantitative statement and panchnama /
The signature of the representative must be taken.
4) In writing to the stakeholders in accordance with natural justice while deciding the case.
Final orders are to be passed only after the statement / argument is made.
14) Enquiry into title under Section 20 (2) of the Revenue Code - Maharashtra Land Revenue
Under section 20 (2) of the Act, 1966, in respect of any property or any
by or on behalf of the Government in respect of any right in or to the property, or
When a claim is made against the government or by any person, the Collector
To make a proper inquiry under section 234 by giving appropriate notice in respect thereof and to pass a judgment thereon.
is intended. If there is a dispute between two people about the right to a property
An inquiry cannot be made under section 20 (2). Article 20 (2) Vacancies of persons and government
Inquiries can only be made if there is a dispute between them about the rights. Section 20 (2) Vacant land
for and relating to the levy or cessation of revenue.
in the property for the registration and preservation of the right, or for similar other purposes.
An investigation into the rights is intended. Under this investigation, the person's ownership /
The ownership is not investigated.
15) Revenue Code Section 155 The following proceedings - Under Section 155 of the Revenue Code,
Correcting errors that may have been admitted by the writing party or interested parties.
The powers of the Collector are vested in the Tehsildar. However, Section 155 is empty.
From the Tahsildar on the disputes between the two parties intended in the appeal process.
Judgments are rendered. According to the M.A. Court Judgment, a writ is an error.
There is no intention behind making the blunder of negligence. At first glance, it appears
Mistakes that don't need to be checked or found. A typographical error is an error that
Which can be corrected with writing and does not require diagnosis.
A typographical error is an accidental error that appears at first glance on the record.
17
# Page 18
There is no need to look for errors. A typographical error is one that is caused by an error.
Following are some examples of typographical errors.
a) misspelling the name of the occupier.
b) Incorrect geometric number.
c) Misstatement of the area of land.
d) Wrongly written, blurred plot number in the map
to keep writing, etc.
Government Decision No. Narrow-2023 / Q. No.149 / E-1 of the Department of Revenue and Forestry
D. 25.07.2023 and the Commissioner and Director of Land Records (Md. State), Pune
Circular No.2 / E Rights / Obligations / 2025 issued in this regard. 07.05.2025
In accordance with section 155 of the Revenue Code, the right to make corrections to the written form, etc.
The use of the Modification Application System is mandatory. In accordance with the
Action is required. The Collector has powers under Section 155.
The powers are delegated to the Tehsildar. Therefore, the Tehsildar
Appeal / Review Petition to the Additional Commissioner against the order under section 155 of the
can be entered.
16) The provision of agricultural land to the holder of the land in the order of land measurement.
On providing roads beyond the boundaries of other land-masses if no road is available for agriculture.
The Tahsildar has powers under Section 143 of the Revenue Code. So the litigant
According to Section 5 of the Courts Act, 1906, roads for agricultural purposes or
Someone may have obstructed or attempted to obstruct the passage of traffic.
The tehsildar has the power to remove it if he does so. the Revenue Code
Under section 143, there are provisions for seeking a new farm, while the litigant's court
According to Section 5 of the Act, 1906, in the prevailing / traditional existing road
There are provisions for removal of obstruction. Accordingly, a case has been registered.
Decisions have to be made. Most of the time, the traditional mode of transport is open and accessible 18.
# Page 19
application has been made. Provided that such cases are adjudicated under the Mamlatdar Courts Act.
Understand that there is a demand for new agricultural land under Section 143 of the Revenue Code without
Accordingly, action is taken to provide a road over the dam. Hence, the application received
A decision should be taken only after considering the demand and the scope of the above two Acts. or
Government Decision No. of the Department: Land-2025 / P.No.47 / J-1A. According to the 22.05.2025,
Regarding the provision of agricultural land and the other rights of the 7/12 to be recorded therein.
Guidelines have been given. Also, sections of the Courts of Litigation Act, 1906
5 and in the claims filed under Section 143 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966.
Site Panchnama and Geo Tag Photo to ensure implementation of the order.
Date of decision of the Revenue and Forest Department, Government to all the field officers / authorities regarding taking
The guidelines given under 29.10.2025 should be followed. Also, the Geo of the roads
Specify its latitude and longitude by tagging.
17) Application Cases - As per Section 54 of the Code of Civil Procedure, liable to pay revenue
so as to apportion the undivided wealth determined or in such wealth
In order to break the stake and give it a separate possession, Ma. Primary by Civil Court
A decree is issued. In order to implement the preliminary decree, Md. Civilian
The district collector is directed by the court. From the Collector
to make actual gratuitous distributions in accordance with the preliminary order of the Civil Court.
The case is transferred to the Tehsildar. Disproportionate Allocation of Wealth of the Revenue Code
As per the Maharashtra Land Revenue (Division of Holding Agricultural Land) Rules, 1967 with Section 85
It has to be done. According to Section 85 of the Revenue Code, the division of Maharashtra is
Preventing and consolidating land fragmentation
It is to be done subject to the provisions of the Act, 1947. But it was decided
is that, when dividing the holding land, the quantities determined for the local area
Consideration of whether or not holding land with less than area is being created
Without it, division takes place. Hence, Maharashtra's prohibition of land-grabbing is 19.
# Page 20
It violates the provisions of the Doing and Consolidating Act, 1947.
In cases where division creates holding land with less than the area of the scale
be made and the primary decree is executed in accordance with section 8A (1) above.
On preventing the tearing of Maharashtra's land, if not possible, and their
Section 8A (2) of the Consolidation Act, 1947.
is. Also in the case where action cannot be taken even under 8A (2), the primary
the court by which the decree has been passed to the court of the modified primary
It is necessary to send for the decree.
From the date of receipt of the application case / preliminary order by the Collectorate.
The Tehsildar concerned shall, within seven days, execute the preliminary order.
be sent to do. However, it has been pointed out that the application is for the prosecution of the cases.
Unemployment has also been pending for years. A review of the work on the proposal case
There is no monthly revenue officers' meeting at the district collector level.
Application cases should be implemented at the campaign level. As well as the District Collector
They should review the proposal cases at the monthly revenue officers' meeting.
Also, the divisional commissioner should review the district collector at the divisional level every month.
In this regard, from time to time. the High Court in the Court Allotment Case (Civil Procedure Code
Section 54) Implementation of preliminary orders at the level of the Collector.
There has been outrage over the delay. as well as the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and
Performance Audit Report of the Advocate General of the State of Maharashtra
Audit) expressed displeasure over the delay in the application case in strong words.
It is.
The Tahsildar, after receiving the preliminary order, shall take the following action:
It is expected that: -
1. On receipt of the preliminary decree, the parties to the decree shall be dealt with by the Tahsildar.
Notice to be served under section 230 of the Revenue Code and parties to the preliminary decree 20
# Page 21
Make sure they are alive. If the party is found to be dead,
It should also be verified that the names of the heirs are entered in the title deed.
If the names of the heirs of the deceased parties have been entered in the title deed
Section 149 and 150 of the Revenue Code as well as Maharashtra regarding filing it if not.
Land Revenue Rights Record and Record (Creation and Maintenance) Rules,
From the date of receipt of direction from the Tehsildar by the concerned Mandal Officer under 1971.
The filing of heirs should be done within three weeks.
2. Prohibition of Partition and Unification of Maharashtra.
According to Section 8A (1) of the Act, the amounts determined for the local area concerned
The first assurance is that no holding land with less than an area is created.
should be done. If holding land with less than the area of the scale is not being created
Only then should the case be transferred to the Deputy Superintendent of Land Records for proper allocation.
In cases where there is no need to divide the plot or subdivision of the plot
to refer such a case to the Deputy Superintendent of Land Records for a detailed distribution.
There's no need. Three weeks from the date of receipt of this order.
needs to be completed inside. in which case, in accordance with section 8A (1), the arising
As per Section 8A (2), if the shares / shares constitute less than the proportionate area,
The proceedings should be completed at the tehsildar level only. the Deputy Superintendent of Land for the case
Records should not be sent to them. From the receipt of the order of proceedings pursuant to section 8A (2)
The tehsildar is to complete it within three months.
(3) Where, in accordance with section 8A (1), the land is required to be partitioned,
The Deputy Superintendent of Land Records, concerned with the case, has the prima facie case for allotment.
The order must be sent within four (4) weeks of receipt. Serious allocation / retention
Division of Land, Maharashtra Land Revenue (Division of Holding Land) Rules, 1967
Under Rule 5, the concerned Deputy Superintendent of Land Records shall do so. In the case of application allocation
Geometrics is the direct distribution of primary geometries by charging a fee for rapid enumeration.
# Page 22
The proceedings should be completed within three months from the receipt of the application and the relevant
The case should be sent to the tehsildar. The Deputy Superintendent of Land Records also
Division of levies by direct allotment, Maharashtra Land Revenue (of holding land)
be made under Rule 6 of the Partition) Rules, 1967.
4. Sub-Divisional Magistrate Land Records receives case for summary allotment proceedings
After this, the Tahsildar listened to the concerned and said, Maharashtra Land Revenue (Retention)
The final allotment order under Rule 7 of the Partition of Land) Rules, 1967 is three weeks long.
have to go in.
5. Possession of land by the concerned Mandal Officer in accordance with the final order of the Tehsildar.
The process of updating the rights record by giving it to the respective holders was completed in seven days.
should do.
18) Taking records in Village Sample No. 7B - Geo-measurement Number or Geo-measurement Number
The right of subdivision must be held by the person in possession of the record.
Record of such person when in possession of a person other than the person, village sample
In No.7B, Maharashtra Land Revenue Rights Record and Record (Creation and
to be carried out in accordance with the procedure laid down in Rule 31 of the Maintenance) Rules, 1971.
However, possession by another person is legal possession. the High Court,
In the case of Kishenpunjaji v. Yashodabai Mahadev, Bombay has made it clear that:
To be in lawful possession or possession of another's land means to be in possession of such other's land.
The occupation / cultivation of land owned by the individual is legal.
There is a base. such other person's possession to the rightful owner, subject to due process of law
It cannot be removed without being removed. The person's possession of another person's property.
If it is not lawful, then on that basis, such other person is lawfully tilling the land.
Can't say. Before entering the village in Sample No. 7B, the landlord must write
Permission granted by contract or other record to another person to acquire land.
It is necessary to be aware of this. Revenue 22 if there is no written document or record
# Page 23
Section 234 in Section 12 of the Code provides for a proper investigation of the original land owner.
It is necessary to ensure that the other person's constipation / planting is consented to.
Only after making sure that the village sample number 7B is recorded and
The objections should be decided within the relevant revenue year.
Narayan Lakshman Patil vs Construction Pvt. Ltd.
As per the judgment, the possession / possession is held by a third party and this possession is objected to by the landlord.
Enter the name of the third person only on the basis of such possession / possession as not taken.
It won't come. Does the person in possession / possession have legal rights?
This needs to be understood.
19) Arbitration Cases - Under Section 3-C (5) and (6) of the National Highways Act, 1956,
Damages determined by the competent authority for land acquisition (CALA)
If the amount of compensation is not agreed upon by both parties, the Central Government may, on the application of one of the parties,
is to be determined by a designated arbitrator. Also, the arbitration process is arbitration and conciliation.
It is to be carried out under the Act, 1996. As an arbitrator for land acquisition of National Highways
The District Collector / Additional Collector of the concerned district has been appointed.
Also under Section 19B (8) of the Maharashtra Highways Act, 1955, the land acquisition officer
If the amount of compensation determined is not acceptable to either party, either party
The amount, if applied for by any of the parties, shall be paid by the Department Commissioner appointed by the State Government.
It has to be decided. The arbitration process is a quasi-judicial process. However, such
It has come up at the level of Additional Collector / Collector as well as Divisional Commissioner.
Arbitration cases at the level of large-scale to determine the amount of compensation
are pending. The longer the arbitration cases go undecided.
The interest at the rate of 9% of the tenure has to be paid to the person losing the land. So
Pending arbitration cases should be settled within a maximum of six months.
Review of arbitration proceedings at the Revenue and Forest Department level every month.
Come.
23
# Page 24
20) Functions under the Vatana / Inam Act - hereditary post, hereditary property,
To transfer / transfer the rights of heirs and heirs, inheritance and residence to the Duma.
Prevention of tax evasion, protection of movable property, remuneration for inheritance work, as well as
The Maharashtra Hereditary Posts Act, with respect to succession to hereditary office, etc.
Decisions need to be made according to 1874. as well as destruction of inheritance / reward under various Acts.
relating to the proceedings relating to the making and return of the held land to the authorised holder.
to perform the functions of the Collector or District Collector under the Act and his
An officer appointed by the state government has powers to exercise the power.
The powers of the above-mentioned District Collectors under the Vatan / Inam Act are vested in another officer.
A clear reference to the relevant rule / notification is quasi-judicial, if submitted.
It is necessary to mention when passing the order. so that the relevant inheritance / reward
There will be clarity on the jurisdiction to take decisions under the Act. As well as most of the
Certain duties of the Collector under the Vatan / Inam Act and the rights of the office thereof; and
The order of deletion and return of the collateral to the holder can be appealed.
No. Only against the compensation fixed by the District Collector. Revenue of Maharashtra
It is important to keep in mind that there is a provision for appeal to the tribunal.
In the Marathwada division, the Hyderabad Extremely Enquiry Act, 1852, was passed.
Inheritance under the Hyderabad Institute in respect of jagir, inam, cash pension, etc., and
Provisions with respect to inquiries into rights, entitlements and interests in excess payments.
Section 3A of the Act provides. However, the application under this Act is large.
The quantities are pending for determination at the sub-collector level. The cases in this regard
Care must be taken to ensure that they are released in a timely manner. the Collector / Divisional
The Commissioner has paid monthly revenue of pending cases under this Act.
The review should be done in a meeting of the officers.
24
# Page 25
21) Proceedings in quasi-judicial cases at the government level - at the government level
In case of return / appeal, the Tahsildar is required to be present for the hearing.
If the hearing at the government level and the hearing at the tehsildar level is on the same day.
If so, the Naib Tehsildar, who handles the rights record, was present on the same day.
You have to stay. Changes / transfers from the beginning regarding dispute resolution
It is necessary to present it at the hearing in chronological form in the form of a detailed table.
There is also a moratorium on the transfer of the manipulator / rights record.
Certified readable copies from the present Tahsildar / Naib Tehsildar
It needs to be done. Mechanical if the original manipulator sheet is worn out / very old
A patterned image is unreadable. So that's
A replica image of the manipulator, the rights record, and other records.
A certified copy must be submitted. As well as the application / appeal case
Accordingly, the revenue authorities whose decision has been challenged agree
Submit a paragraph-wise report of the done / signed. In the paragraph-wise report
quasi-judicial proceedings at the level of lower level revenue officers only.
Without specifying the details, self-explanatory feedback should be provided in accordance with the demand in the application / appeal.
should be done. Notices of hearing at the government level to the parties at least before the hearing.
The office of the relevant Ministry and the relevant office shall be convened 7 days in advance.
The tehsildar should ensure. Tahsildar attends government-level hearing
Reporting the issuance of the notice during the stay, access to it and complete information about the case and
Submit the documents as well as a copy of the applicant's application to Jabdar.
It has to be done. Government Circular of this Department: No.2023 / P.No.80 / J-1A dated
As on 07.08.2023, Additional Commissioner, Deputy Director (Land Records) or Competent Officer
if the quasi-judicial order passed by it has not been implemented and
As the quasi-judicial order has been challenged by the concerned, the concerned at the government level.
Interim or final 25 of such hearing after receipt of notice of hearing at field level.
# Page 26
After the order is passed, the Additional Commissioner / Deputy Director, Land Records or the competent authority
The order passed by them should not be implemented. as well as the authority of this order
should not be recorded in the record. At that time, the government. Minister (Revenue) / Md. Minister of State
(Revenue) Awaiting quasi-judicial order from the Court of Regional Revenue
The authorities have to do it.
22) Evaluation of quasi-judicial work - Monthly assessment of revenue officers by the Collector.
A detailed review of the quasi-judicial proceedings should be taken up at the meeting to be held. Two days a week
the day the hearing is held or how and when the cases are being disposed of; or
How to review it. The divisional commissioner also held a meeting with the district collector.
The aforesaid aspects should be reviewed on Revenue Officer-wise basis. each of the revenues.
Miscellaneous of the officer (Tehsildar / Sub Divisional Officer / Deputy Collector)
the legality of at least 5% of the orders passed under the Act; or
The Collector should examine the propriety and the regularity of the proceedings.
Whereas, 3% of the orders passed by each Additional Collector are inspected by the Divisional
The Commissioner must do so. 5% of the decisions of the Additional Divisional Commissioner are examined by the Additional Chief
Secretary and Officer on Special Duty (AWARI). About the investigation
The review should be done in a meeting of revenue officials at the collector level. as well as
Review should also be done at the District Collector's meeting at the Divisional Commissioner level. the Departmental
The Commissioner shall, after every three months, dispense with quasi-judicial cases and decide
Additional District Collector, Sub-Divisional Officer and Tehsildar of the division regarding quality
They should have a joint sitting (of one day) and review the quasi-judicial proceedings.
And guide as needed. The quality and quality of quasi-judicial work
Exit timelines will be the assessment reference of the Annual Confidential Report. In the case of which
Refund proceedings are required to be carried out under Section 257 of the Revenue Code.
Refund proceedings should be carried out in accordance with the jurisdiction in the case. Tehsildar / Sub-Divisional
26
# Page 27
The officer shall, within his jurisdiction, record and approve the sanction proceedings in accordance with the provisions of the Penal Code.
It should be checked to see if the procedure is being followed.
23) Division of Cases - Each Revenue Officer-wise assignment by the Divisional Commissioner.
Analysis, cases filed in the last three years, and disposal of cases
Considering the duration, how many cases per month each revenue officer
Make sure that it needs to be released. Monthly Receipts and Pending Cases
Considering the cases, under Section 226 of the Revenue Code, the excess charge dimension
Transfer of cases of existing revenue officers to other revenue officers.
The decision should be taken by the Divisional Commissioner / Collector. but at least 30 quasi-judicial
Cases must be issued monthly. Revenue officers with more than 30 per month
More cases have to be issued their additional cases other revenue
Transfer proceedings to officers from the level of Collector / Divisional Commissioner.
should be done.
24) Training and Capacity Building - Presiding Officers / Probationers dealing with quasi-judicial matters.
Enhancement of competencies, skills, in-depth knowledge of various Acts of the Appellate Authority.
Regular training needs to be conducted in order to be able to do this. For First Training (MAH)
March / April 2026) One-two-day workshop at Zonal level
In order to make ma. Seek the help of the quasi-judicial cell at the establishment of the Minister (Revenue).
Thereafter, revision training classes are held at the divisional level at the end of May every year.
It should be conducted by the Divisional Commissioner. Examination of Revenue Officers after training.
In this training class, the subjects of quasi-judicial work, natural justice, revenue code, etc.
the provisions of section 12 and section 13 as well as the quasi-judicial functions under various Acts.
Procedure of business, under the relevant Act. the Supreme Court as well as various
Important Judgments of the High Court, Government Decisions / Circulars, etc.
should be included. also in quasi-judicial cases at the level of Divisional Commissioner.
i-27 by creating a training module on the working procedure of a claim filed under section
# Page 28
Upload to the Got system. The use of artificial intelligence (AI) tools is semi-judicial.
To seek the guidance of experienced experts on how to perform the task.
Come.
25) Administrative Matters - Benches at each level shall be constituted by the District Collector concerned.
Separate for lawyers, parties and others attending quasi-judicial proceedings and hearings.
Furniture and other necessary facilities such as drinking water, toilets, etc.
It should be created by the Collector.
26) Integrity, objectivity and accountability - the power to decide on quasi-judicial proceedings.
The person / authority to whom these have been provided / directed /
The authority has to take a decision. Relating to the right to quasi-judicial decision-making
A delegation cannot be made unless the Act provides for it. quasi-judicial decision
Objective consideration of the facts of the case, facts, provisions of the relevant law
A decision has to be made. (Application of mind). mechanical in any case.
Semi-judicial decisions by procedure as well as on the advice / guidance of other persons / institutions.
should not be taken. The result sheet must be prepared by the presiding officer concerned himself.
The result sheet should not be prepared by the Bye Mechanism / Secondary Officer.
In most Acts, quasi-judicial proceedings are Indian Penal Code / Indian Justice.
As per the Code 2023, it has been treated as a judicial proceeding. Therefore, the semi-judicial
To conduct the proceedings with integrity, non-discrimination / impartiality and with due diligence.
It's necessary. a public servant performing quasi-judicial functions independently and fearlessly
In order to work, disciplinary action is usually not taken. However, the exceptional
Disciplinary action if the conduct of the presiding officer under the circumstances indicates misconduct.
action can be taken. Giving false evidence or presiding in a judicial proceeding
Intentional insult to public servant or obstruction of work as well as quasi-judicial
28
# Page 29
It is a punishable offence for a public servant looking after the affairs to report / pass judgment corruptly.
It is.
27) Use of Official Language Marathi in quasi-judicial functions - Maharashtra Official Languages Act,
In the year 1964. Devanagari as the official language of the state of Maharashtra from 26 January 1965.
The Marathi language in the script has been adopted. Maharashtra under the said Act.
The Official Languages (Prohibited Purposes) Rules, 1966, d. Executed by notification on 30.04.1966
have arrived. The Government Circular No. of the Department of Marathi Language in this regard is as follows: - Mabhava-
2018 / Q. 47 / Languages - As on 07.05.2018, the official language of the Government is Marathi.
Instructions for use are provided. Sections of the Maharashtra Official Languages Act, 1964
According to Article 4 of the Constitution, Article No. As mentioned in 345, all government
For purposes / in administrative practice, Marathi is Devanagari in relation to the state of Maharashtra.
The language to be used is the Marathi language in the script. Therefore, in a quasi-judicial case
Decisions to be passed must be in the Marathi language in the Devanagari script.
Accordingly, in quasi-judicial proceedings, the application / appeal is in Marathi in Devanagari script.
It is obligatory. Lower-level revenue officials who have challenged the government
The statement of the applicant and the assessee in the quasi-judicial proceedings decision as well as in the judgment.
Abstract / fairness is stated in English. Hence, the revenue officials
When passing quasi-judicial orders, they should be in Marathi in Devanagari script.
Be cautious. Government Decision Number of the General Administration Department: - Mabhava-
1086/432 Q. No. 161/86/20 -B dated 18th July, 1986 in Government practice
Officers / staff who refuse to use Marathi without a joint reason
Instructions have been given to take disciplinary action against them.
Take it.
28) Development of Revenue Tribunal Case Management System (RCCMS) and Technology.
Enhancing Utilization - A committee headed by the Divisional Commissioner, Pune has been appointed to look into the matter.
29
# Page 30
In accordance with the report submitted to the Government of India as well as the Rural
The system to be developed by the Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Development.
Accordingly, the Commissioner and Director, Land Records (Maharashtra State), Pune,
A revenue case management system should be developed for the state. as well as quasi-judicial
To use maximum technology and artificial intelligence in operations.
Planning should be done in a holistic manner.
The Government decision is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37