# Page 1
your government service centers.
Regarding the determination of quality
Government of Maharashtra
Revenue and Forest Department
Government Circular No: Narrow 2023 / P.No.30 / Coordination-2 (M-6)
Madam Cama Road, Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk,
First Floor, Mantralaya, Mumbai-32
Date: 26th of May, 2026
Reference: - Department of Information Technology (DIT), Govt. No.Mattans-1716 / P.S. 517/39,
Dated January 19, 2018
The Directorate of Information and Technology directed all district collectors to assess the quality of all their government service centres in the district before 31 January every year.
the number of transactions made and the number of services provided, the treatment given to citizens,
Our government was to classify the performance of service centres into A, B, C and D based on the digital delivery facilities provided to the citizens, etc. Nine districts are under trial.
On inspection, only the city of Mumbai served its respective government once in 2020.
It has been found that the quality of the centres has been determined. The District Collector of Mumbai City
At the time of assessment, out of a total of 69 government service centers, 24 government service centers were either closed or cable networks, courier services, mobile stores were set up at these government service centers.
It was found that such private businesses were being run. Thus, the under-test
Out of the districts done (eight out of nine districts), 89% of the District Collectors were not using the important tool to determine the quality of their Government Service Centres.
Circular: - Guidelines regarding our Government Service Centres have been issued by the Department of Information Technology (DIT) vide Government Decision dated 19th January, 2018. All of the departments
The Commissioner and the Collector are directed to follow the guidelines of the Government.
To assess the quality of Government Service Centres and fix the grade before 31st January every year.
Action should be taken and a report should be submitted to the government every year.
The above directions should be strictly followed.
3. This Government Circular is available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in.