# Page 1
Under the Maharashtra Right to Public Service Act
On keeping records
Government of Maharashtra
Revenue and Forest Department
Government Circular No: Narrow 2023 / P.No.30 / Coordination-2 (M-6)
Madam Cama Road, Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk,
First Floor, Mantralaya, Mumbai-32
Date: 26th of May, 2026
Reference: - Government Notification, General Administration Department No. Narrow 2015 / Q. No. 135/18 (R) And why. )
Dated 16th November, 2016
Officer appointed as per Rule 17 of the Maharashtra Public Service Rights Rules, First Appellate Authority
and the Second Appellate Authority for matters relating to Form IV 5, either in manuscript or electronic form.
It was also necessary to keep records in form. The General Administration Department of the Government of Maharashtra made the provision in the Act.
The date of application and the date of disposal of the application must be on the portal to ensure compliance.
A directive was issued stating that it was mandatory to make available. Out of 52 offices in nine divisions in nine districts examined, 50 offices were electronically and handwritten on the Form IV portal.
It was found not to have been kept in form. Thus, the feasibility of the delivery of services is lacking in the absence of a primary record.
Transparency could not be ensured.
Circular: - Maharashtra Right to Public Service Rules, 2016 - Officer Designated as per Rule 17, First Appeal
There is a provision that the authority and the Second Appellate Authority shall also record the cases in Sample IV either in person or in electronic format.
All the District Collectors have been appointed under the Maharashtra Right to Public Service Rules, 2016 as per the provisions of Rule 17.
The Designated Officer, First Appellate Authority and Second Appellate Authority shall also take action to record the cases as mentioned in Sample IV in respect of the applications / appeals received. and reports every year.
submitted to the government.
The above directions should be strictly followed.
This Government Circular is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.