# Page 1
To constitute a committee to examine the tender and other related matters for the breakfast to be held on the anniversary of Independence Day.
The Government of Maharashtra
the General Administration Division
Government Circular No: CER-2018/ PR No. 137/30
Hutatma Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Road
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032
Date: July 5, 2018.
Government circular:
Every year on 15th August, Independence Day is celebrated. The main official function is celebrated by hoisting the flag by the Chief Minister in the premises of the Mantralaya. As part of the ceremony, Shri. The Chief Minister will address the convocation at the convocation hall, Mumbai University, Mumbai or at such place as may be decided by him, at 5-00 pm. Cabinet Members, Foreign Consul, Bharat Ratna-Padma awardees and other distinguished personalities, Hon'ble High Court Judges, Hon'ble Judges of the High Courts, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the High Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the High Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Judges of India, Judges of the Supreme Court Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Judges of India, Judges of India A banquet is held for judges, members of the legislature, and other dignitaries.
2. Rates for snacks on the occasion are sought from experienced suppliers through a limited e-tendering process. A Committee is being constituted to scrutinize these tenders and other related matters as follows: 1 ACS/ Principal Secretary& Chief Administrative Officer Chairman 2 Deputy Secretary, Rajshahi-30, General Administration Department Member 3 Under Secretary, Rajshahi-30/31, General Administration Department Member 4 Cell Officer, Rajshahi-30, General Administration Department Member Secretary
(3) The Committee shall take necessary action in respect of scrutiny of tenders received every year and to examine other related matters.