# Page 1
To meet the expenses of General Administration Department (Information Technology) Sub-Division from their sanctioned grant including vehicle.
The Government of Maharashtra
the General Administration Department
Government Resolution No. Parichay-2022/ P. No. 46/ K. 24
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032
Date: June 22, 2022
Governance Decisions: The General Administration Division is the largest division in the Ministry and under the Department 1) Elections, Sub-Division 2) State Administration, Sub-Division 3) Information Technology, Sub-Division 4) Information and Public Relations, Sub-Division. Separate heads of accounts have been sanctioned to the concerned Sub-Divisions to meet their office expenses. Therefore, the expenditure on stationery/ stationery and vehicle for his office is being borne by the Sub Divisional Office. The stationery supplied free of cost by Government Press, Mumbai and Yerawada Jail Press, Pune is made available to the General Administration Department (GAD), if so requested by the concerned Sub-Division. However, all stationery/ stationery/ computer expenses/ vehicle expenses/ xerox expenses are being met by the respective Sub-Divisions through mutual purchase.
However, the Chief Secretary (Smt. c) What is the cost of fuel and repairs for the vehicle in their possession? It was divided into 24. Since the IT Sub-Division has been granted separate head of accounts 20520473 to meet the expenditure, the Government hereby approves to meet all the expenditure on stationery/ stationery in the office of the IT Sub-Division and fuel/ repair in the vehicle of the Principal Secretary (IT) out of their sanctioned grant. The General Administration Department (GAD) has permanently transferred the vehicle number MH-01-AN-0487 Honda Sinti to the IT Sub-Division and henceforth the expenditure on the vehicle will be borne by the IT Sub-Division. Why all this? 39 will be dealt with. This government decision is being issued with the consent of the Department of Information Technology.