# Page 1
The Government of Maharashtra
the General Administration Department
No: Rep-1022/ Q.No.83/ Q.14
Hutatma Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032
Date: 12th of August 2022
the order
Dr. Tushar Pawar, Under Secretary, General Administration Department is being appointed on deputation for a period of two years initially subject to the following terms and conditions, by way of reduction in his pay scale as Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the State Health Guarantee Society under the Public Health Department.
(a) Dr. Tushar Pawar, Under-Secretary, shall commence the service of the Deputy Secretary on the date on which he enters upon the office of the Deputy Secretary and shall, on the date on which he enters upon his parent department, cease to hold the office of the Deputy Secretary after a period of two years.
(b) The Government/ competent authority shall reserve the right to recall them at any time before the expiry of the period of deputation, if their services are deemed necessary by the Government in the interest of public service.
(a) If their services are not required by the non-recipient employer, the non-recipient employer shall have the right to send them back to the parent department. Provided that before such repatriation, the non-recipient employer shall give three months' notice to the Government/ competent authority; and (d) they shall be allowed to return to the parent department after giving at least three months' written notice to the Government/ competent authority that they intend to return to the parent department.
2. M.N.S. (Period of holding office, Non-Ministerial Service. The terms and conditions of the deputation shall be decided by the General Administration Department in consultation with the Public Health Department, taking into consideration the terms and conditions mentioned in Rule 40 (Annexure-II) of the Rules, 1981.
All other administrative matters regarding the deputation of Dr. Tushar Pawar, Under Secretary will be handled by the Public Health Department.