# Page 1
Regarding allotment of space to Divisional Commissioner Konkan Division (Revenue Branch) and Superintendent of Police / Deputy Commissioner of Police, Police Communication and Information Technology Marine Division, Navi Mumbai in the Administrative Building at Konkan Bhawan.
Government of Maharashtra
the General Administration Department,
Government Decision No. Shakaja-11926 / P.S. No. 62/2026 Niwas-1,
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032,
Date: August 7, 2026.
Reference: - Government Decision No. Shakaja-1126 / Q. No. 42/2026 Niwas-1, D. 30.06.2026.
Preamble: - The Zonal Caste Certificate Verification Committee No. 1 Office shifted to Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Samajik Nyay Bhawan, Kalwa, Thane with a total area of 1001 sq. Foot space has been allotted to Regional Deputy Director, Other Backward Bahujan Welfare Department, Mumbai Division. Now the remaining 965 sq. Foot space is provided to the office of the Divisional Commissioner Konkan Division (Revenue Branch) as well as 308 sq. A proposal to allot the foot space to the office of the Superintendent of Police / Deputy Commissioner of Police, Police Communication and Information Technology Marine Division, Navi Mumbai was under consideration of the government. Accordingly, the government has taken the following decision.
Government Decision: - The Divisional Commissioner Konkan Division (Revenue Branch) has been given 965 sq.ft. of Konkan Bhawan Building, Ground Floor Hall No. G-9, which is presently vacant. Foot space is being allocated.
2. Also 308 sq. ft. in Hall No. G-726. Foot space is being allotted to the office of the Superintendent of Police / Deputy Commissioner of Police, Police Communication and Information Technology Marine Division, Navi Mumbai.
3. The Divisional Commissioner, Konkan Division shall hand over the possession of the aforesaid land to the concerned and submit a report thereon to the Government.
The Government decision was made available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.