# Page 1
Various under seven administrative divisions of the state.
On inclusion of furniture in government accommodation budget - Guide
Reckon...
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Public Works,
Government Circular No: BDG-2025 / Q.No. 1973 / EMA-2
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032.
Date: 25th September, 2025
Read: Public Works Department Government Circular No.Sankarna-2019 / Q.No.10 / EMA-2, dated 25.09.2019 Preamble: Rs. Construction of various government buildings in the state costing less than Rs 15 crore is being consumed.
Technical consent to be given by the Regional Chief Engineer for grant of administrative approval by the Department.
The referenced d. The guidelines were issued through a circular of 25.09.2019.
In this guideline, while preparing the construction budget, the government may prescribe
The sample was also attached, mentioning the use of a recapitulation sheet.
Also, furniture is not provided in government residences as furnitures are not made available.
It could not be kept. However, Ma. Government at the meetings of the High-Level Committee of Secretaries dated 16.07.2025
Accommodation budgets only deal with the provision of fixed (immovable) furniture, as well as air-conditioned appliances.
Instructions have been received to provide only wiring and paramping for cooking gas.
According to Ma. Issue of revised guidelines as suggested by the High-Level Committee of Secretaries
It was under the consideration of the government.
Government Decision: Budget for construction of various Government Residences under all the Administrative Divisions of the State.
When manufactured, it includes only fixed (immovable) furniture as well as air-conditioned appliances and cooking gas.
Provision for wiring b pariping should be made.
2. Used for provision of furniture in these buildings (stilts, parking, terraces, etc.)
excluding) assuming an area of 70% of the built-up area and calculating the rate according to the above paragraph.
Furniture should be provided.
x. This Government decision is available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra - www.maharashtra.gov.in