# Page 1
Regarding the point name of the employees in the supply department of the regional office and keeping the establishment separate...
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection
Government Circular No: NISHIKA- 2118/ PR No.105/ NO.15
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Ministry (Extension), Mumbai
The date: November 3, 2018.
Reference: Circular dated 02/11/2018 of Govt.
Government circular
The above Reference Circular of the Government is being cancelled due to typographical errors and the revised Circular is as follows.
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Department is a separate department like other departments of the State Government. This department deals with the supply of goods in the state. There is a separate system at the district level. The separate figure of this department has been issued by the Government Decision dated 26th June, 2003. The entry into service of the posts in this department is independent of rules.
It has been observed by the Government that all the posts created as per the supply system diagram at the district and division level are shown on the establishment of the Collector and Divisional Commissioner instead of separately on the establishment of the Supply Department and are deemed to be on the revenue establishment. Actually, this assumption is completely wrong.
4. As mentioned above, the supply department has a separate structure. The posts in the supply department have their own separate service entry rules. Therefore, the posts of supply department at the district level are not of the revenue department, but of the supply department. In view of this fact, the establishment of posts in the Supply Department should be considered separately and the diagram and point list of Group-C and Group-D posts in the Supply Department in the office of the Collector and Divisional Commissioner should be kept separately.
5.The proceedings should be completed within one month and the report should be submitted to the government without fail.
This Government Circular is available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra with code 201811031328431006. This order is being issued by digital signature.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.
Satish
Civil Supply, postalCode=400032, st= MaharashtraShridhar Supe
(Mr. Supe)
Joint Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, 1. All Divisional Commissioners, 2. All Deputy Commissioners (Supplies), 3. All Collectors, 4. All District Supply Officers, 5. Selectors- 15.