# Page 1
Guidelines for fixing contracts for transportation and warehousing of foodgrains and other essential commodities to fair price shops under the revised grain distribution system.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A,
Hutatma Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg,
Mantralaya Extension, Mumbai- 400 032
The date: November 1, 2018
Read:- 1) Government Resolution No. Shivap 1010/ No.198/ No. P. 28, p. February 23, 2012.
(2) Government Decision No. Contract 1012/ No.60/ No.16-A, D. 26th November, 2012). Contract No.1016/ No.16-A, D. 20th April, 2017) Government Corrigendum No. Contract No.1016/ No.16-A, D. 26th May, 2017) No. Contract No.1016/ No.16-A, D. 26th May, 2017). Contract 1217/ No.98/ No.16-A, D. 08th May, 2018) Government Corrigendum No. Contract 1217/ No.98/ No.16-A, D. 1st October, 2018) Government Circular No. Contract 1216/ No.184/ No.16-A, D. July 06, 2017
Preamble: To bring in more transparency at all stages under the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) and to facilitate delivery of foodgrains to ration shops, a revised Foodgrain Distribution System (FDS) has been proposed in Reference No. 1 has been prescribed as per the government decision here. Under the new transport system, it has also been decided to transport food grains from the base depot of the Food Corporation of India to the ration distribution shop through a single transporter across the district at government expense.
According to reference no. 2 here. As per the decision taken by the Government on 26.11.2012, the transportation of foodgrains has been made operational in 17 districts of the State after completing the tender process. However, despite repeated tender processes in the Mumbai Thane rationing area, as well as in 17 other districts, the tender process was not successful. Keeping in view the difficulties specific to the Municipal Corporation area, zero point concept, inconsistency in the base price due to which the transporters are not able to afford the transportation, the revised guidelines for fixing the food grain transportation contract by removing the above shortcomings have been issued in Reference No. 3 here. It was released on April 20, 2017. Accordingly, the tender process has been completed in the remaining districts of the state.
# Page 2
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
Reference No. 6 Under the Government decision here, guidelines have been issued regarding the fixing of contracts for the handling of food grains in the government grain warehouses in the state. 7 The Government hereby directs to fix the tenancy contracts in all the districts for the period up to the expiry of the transport contracts in that district.
At present, the state has separate contracts for transportation of foodgrains under the Targeted Public Distribution System and handling of foodgrains in government godowns.
With a view to streamline and speed up the work of transportation and handling of foodgrains at the warehouse level, it was under the consideration of the Government to implement a combined tender process for transportation and handling at the warehouse level.
GOVERNMENT DECISIONS: The Government has decided to enter into joint contracts for transportation and handling of wheat, rice, pulses, sugar (other ration items as decided by the Government from time to time) etc. to fair price shops under the revised food grain distribution system under the Targeted Public Distribution System. The terms and conditions and guidelines for this tender process are prescribed as follows.
(1) Improved transport and handling system:
1.1 Phase I Transportation: The first phase of transportation of foodgrains from the base depot of Food Corporation of India to the government grain godowns, unloading the foodgrains in the government godowns and standardizing them (making each gunny bag 50 kg).
Under the first phase, in the district headquarters towns, where the base depot of the Food Corporation of India and the government grain godown are located in the same city, the food grains should be delivered to the ration shops from the base depot of the Food Corporation of India (from the designated godown in the case of sugar) and the food grains should be packed in the shop.
1.2. Second stage transportation: Stamping of certified foodgrains, sugar etc. in government grain godowns by loading them in vehicles, then second stage transportation to unload them in ration shops, stapling them in shops.
1.3 Certification and storage of foodgrains shall be done by the contractor in regular government godowns. After authentication, the stitching of the sacks can be done using a sewing machine or twine.
2.1 Open E-Tenders for award of contracts for transportation and handling of foodgrains (including sugar) and other commodities under various schemes under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) by the Government.
Page 23 of 2
# Page 3
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
The District Collector will be responsible for inviting bids, completing the tender process and signing the agreement with the approved bidder within the stipulated time.
2.2 The District Level Tender Committee shall have the powers to open the technical envelope of the tender, to technically qualify the tenderer, to open the envelope of rates and to approve the tender rates within the limits provided.
2.3 In accordance with the instructions of the General Administration Department's Government Decision No. 273/39, dated November 26, 2014, for open tenders, as well as the Department of Industry, Energy and Labor's Reference No. 1 here. The open e-tendering process should be carried out as per the provisions of the Government Resolution dated 1st December, 2016.
2.4 The Collector will be responsible for completing the entire tender process and entering into an agreement with the approved tenderer within the stipulated time.
2.5 The Collector shall have the power to accept or reject the entire tender or part of the tender without assigning any reason.
(3) Responsibilities of the Authority Inviting Tender: 3.1 The Government shall make available a photocopy of the decision along with the tender form.
3.2 After the tender is published, before the contractors submit the tender, the Collector shall hold a pre-bid conference with the interested bidders and clear their doubts by giving detailed information about the terms, conditions and work to be done in the tender to the tenderer.
The date of this meeting should be mentioned in the advertisement while publishing the tender.
3.3 The Collector should ensure that the tender gets wide publicity.
3.4 The Collector should provide information to the tenderer in the tender documents about the prescribed base depot of the Food Corporation of India for the district and the distance of the government warehouses in the district from these base depots, the average distance, the monthly allocation of the district and the capacity of the vehicles required for it, etc.
3.5 Even if the transportation of Government warehouses has been planned at the district level, the tenderer should be given a clear idea that the tenderer will have to transport from any base depot for the district to any Government warehouse in the district.
No demand for additional payments will be taken into account if such transport is to be carried out during the contract period. Considering these factors, the bidder has to pay the tender price.
3.6 For the second phase, the list of taluk-wise ration distribution shops, their average distance from the government godown, the total monthly allotment of all ration distribution shops and the number of vehicles required for it, etc. should be made available to the tenderer.
Page 23 of 3
# Page 4
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
(4) Base Rates for Tendering Process: 4.1 The stage-wise base rates of transportation fixed for tendering process as per the procedure of transportation and handling shall be as follows:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Mode of transport             | Base Rate (Rupee per quintal) for whole gap |
| The first stage of transport  | 50.88                                       |
| The second phase of transport | 42.40                                       |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.2 The base rates for the tender process shall be the base rates for the transportation in paragraph 4.1 above. The tenderer has to pay separate rates for each stage of transportation.
4.3 Rates per quintal of Phase-I transportation shall be applicable for direct transportation proposed at certain locations in Para 1.1 of the District Headquarters.
4.4 Bids at 20% or less of the base price shall not be accepted, in which case the re-tendering process shall be carried out.
4.5 districts. In the Government Resolution dated 8th May, 2018, No. The base rates of all the work items prescribed under clause 4 or the actual rates of the contractual workers, whichever is higher, shall be the base rates of the contract. The rates for handling are not the rates for tendering process.
4.6 In the event of inability of Food Corporation of India to make available the allocation from the prescribed base depot on account of unavoidable reasons, the additional cost of such transportation should be approved as follows, in case the transportation has to be made from the alternate depot. The higher percentage of transportation charges shall be provided for the distance covered over the average distance taken into account for that phase at the time of tendering. Under no circumstances should the payments of the transporter be kept pending for this reason. The additional expenditure in this regard will be borne by the Food Corporation of India.
For example:- Assuming the average distance between the base depot of the Food Corporation of India and the concerned government warehouse to be 65 km, Rs. The base rate has been fixed at 50.88 per cent. If the transportation is beyond 100 km due to unavoidable reasons, the payment of transportation will be considered as follows.
Page 23 of 4.
# Page 5
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Average Distance Between FCI Base Depot And Related |  Government Warehouse (In Km) | Fixed Base Rate (Rs. | Average traffic in unavoidable circumstances (in km) | Average increase in distance traveled (in percentage) | Accordingly, the increase in transportation charges (Rs.) | Rate per quintal for average transportation of 100 km (Rs.) |
| 65                                                  | 50.88                         | 100                  | 53.85                                                | 27.40                                                 | 78.28                                                     |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
While publishing the tender for this, the District Supply Office should determine the average distance between the base depot of the district and the government godowns and accordingly consider the above.
4.7 For the next tender process, the base rate for the new tender process shall be the rate at which the approved rate for the previous tender plus the increase/ decrease in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) over 3 years.
(5) Terms and Conditions of Eligibility of Tender: The tenderer shall pay the tender price after considering the following factors while making the tender.
5.1 Financial Experience: The tenderer should have at least one year's experience in any previous transport work. The experience of the tenderer in handling of foodgrains and government/ semi-government transport will be taken into consideration, but will not be a condition of technical qualification.
5.2 Financial Struggle: The tenderer must have a financial strength to transport under the Targeted Public Distribution System, for which the total minimum financial turnover of the tenderer in any one financial year only is Rs. Rs 1.50 crore.
5.3 The cost of the tender form will be Rs.10,000/-.
5.4 Issue Amount: 5.4.1 with tender of Rs. 15.00 lakh.
5.4.2 Suppliers registered as suppliers under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 shall be exempted from payment of tender fee and issue amount.
5.4.3 The amount of the loan should be paid online/ in cash.
5.4.4 Those who have paid the amount of the tender are obliged to pay the tender, in case of non-payment of the tender, their entire amount of the tender shall be forfeited.
5.4.5 The entire amount paid shall be forfeited by disqualifying the tenderer of the tenderer who pays less than the specified amount.
Page 23 of 5
# Page 6
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
5.4.6 The Collector should clearly mention in the tender notice in whose name the amount is to be paid.
5.4.7 After the opening of the tender, all eligible/ ineligible bidders, except the lowest bidder, shall be refunded the amount within seven days.
5.4.8 No interest will be paid on the amount.
5.4.9 If the amount is not returned within two months, 10% interest will be payable on the delay and the full amount of interest will be recovered from the concerned officer/ employee responsible for the delay.
5.4.10 If the following is not fulfilled by the tenderer, the amount of the tender shall be forfeited.
Withdrawal or modification of tender or offer after the last date of acceptance of tender, 2) Not signing the contract, 3) Not paying the security deposit required for performance as per the contract after acceptance of tender or offer, 4) Not fulfilling any other conditions before signing the contract as specified in the tender document.
5.5 NOTES: 5.5.1 No back guarantee shall be taken with the tender. However, the tenderer who has been approved has paid Rs. The reserve amount of Rs. 1.50 crore shall be taken as bank guarantee for a period of three and a half years as follows:
(i) by a demand draft drawn in the name of the Authority inviting the tender and payable at the city of the Authority inviting the tender; (ii) by a bank guarantee, which remains valid during the period of the contract, in any scheduled commercial bank/ nationalised bank.
5.5.2 The authenticity of the bank guarantee should be verified by the bank concerned.
5.5.3 Ensure that the Bank Guarantee remains valid for the entire duration of the contract.
5.5.4 The Bank Guarantee should be deposited as soon as possible after the tender is approved. However, considering the minimum time required by the bank, an appropriate extension should be given.
5.6 Amount of Security Deposit: 5.6.1 An amount equal to the issue amount shall be deposited as security deposit by the tenderer whose tender has been approved.
Page 23 of 6.
# Page 7
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
5.6.2 No interest shall be payable on the amount of security deposit.
5.7 Bank guarantees and security deposits should be used in the following circumstances:
5.7.1 Recovery of costs incurred for alternative transportation in case of sudden stoppage of transportation and handling work by the tenderer.
5.7.2 If there are no other ways left to recover the penalty imposed on the tenderer.
5.7.3 The tenderer's contract of transportation and handling has ended but there is some inflow, recovery from him. If there is no other way to recover it, the same amount should be recovered from the security deposit and bank guarantee.
5.8 Assume 25% increase in the price of tender form, reserve amount, financial cover, security deposit, bank guarantee every three years and accordingly determine the financial value of the property.
5.9 Combined Carrying Capacity of Essential Vehicles Owned and Controlled by the Tenderer:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Details                       | Minimum vehicle capacity (MT) | Minimum combined carrying capacity (MT) |
| Self-driving vehicles         | Controlled vehicles           |
| The first stage of transport  | 9                             | of 100 tons.                            | of 100 tons. |
| The second phase of transport | 2                             | of 50 tons.                             | of 50 tons.  |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.10 In the case of partnership firms/ societies/ co-operative societies, the vehicles in the name of the partner/ director/ member and their experience are the vehicles owned by that partnership firm/ co-operative society and the previous one year transaction of these vehicles will be considered as the financial transaction of the institution.
5.11 If the tender holder is a private firm/ proprietary firm, the vehicles submitted along with the tender should be in the name of the private person.
If the vehicles are owned in the name of a partnership firm/ cooperative society/ private person having the carrying capacity equal to the sum of the carrying capacity of the owned vehicles and the carrying capacity of the vehicles under control as determined for technical qualification, there is no need to have separate vehicles under control.
5.13 The tender shall be accompanied by a certified affidavit from the competent transport authority (RC Book with Fitness Certificate) regarding the ownership and control of the vehicles to be submitted along with the tender and that they are fit for use for the entire contract period.
Page 23 of 7.
# Page 8
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
5.14 The vehicles owned and controlled to be submitted along with the tender shall be required to submit an undertaking to the tenderer that the goods, including cement, fertilizer, chemicals, coal, which may affect the quality of food grains in the future, shall not be transported during the contract period as per the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
(6) Tender Procedure: 6.1 The tendering procedure shall be carried out by adopting the e-tendering procedure as per the Government Decision No. Matts/ Nasti 2012/ PR No. 273/39, dated 26th November, 2014 of the General Administration Department.
6.2 The procedure and guidelines to be followed for e-tendering are available at http:// mahatenders.gov.in. Action should be taken accordingly.
6.3 Transport and Handling Two leaf method will be adopted for tender. The first envelope shall be a technical envelope containing proof of eligibility of the tenderer and signed documents confirming acceptance of the terms and conditions of the tender. The second envelope will be the price envelope in which the bidder will declare his price.
6.4 No conditional rates will be accepted in the tender.
6.5 Considering the amount of the tender, the Department of Industry, Energy and Labor's Reference No. 1 here. The tender period should be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the Government Decision dated December 1, 2016.
6.6 The following documents are to be submitted in Technical Envelope A (Technical Envelope).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A.A.    | List of documents                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| 1       | Transport Business Registration Certificate of the prescribed authority (If there is a registration certificate of Enterprises, Traders, it must have a clear mention of transport)                                                                                                |
| 2       | Agreement/ Rules regarding Partnership Firm/ Co-operative Society                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| 3       | Affidavit that if the tender is approved, the organization will be registered as an owner with the Mathadi Board                                                                                                                                                                   |
| The OC4 | If the tender is approved, the vehicles owned and controlled shall not transport goods like cement, fertilizer, chemicals, coal, which will affect the quality of food grains later, as per the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, during the contract period. |
| 5       | A certificate from a Chartered Accountant showing the financial acumen and experience of the tenderer.                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 6       | Attested copies of RC book and fitness certificates (issued by the concerned competent authority) of the vehicle owned and controlled.                                                                                                                                             |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 23 of 8.
# Page 9
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 7  | Statement showing the number of vehicles owned, their capacity and ownership etc. against the carrying capacity mentioned in the tender. |
| 8  | Statement showing the number of vehicles under the control, their capacity and ownership etc. as mentioned in the tender.                |
| 9  | Cash amount (if not paid online)                                                                                                         |
| 10 | A declaration of acceptance of and adherence to all the terms and conditions of the Government Order.                                    |
| 11 | A copy of the TAN number or PAN number of the bidder                                                                                     |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.7 Completion of documents in Technical Envelope A should be completed at the time of submission of tender.
No new documents will be accepted after the opening of the technical envelope. The tender should be disqualified if it is found to be less than the qualifications mentioned in the document and terms/ conditions in the technical envelope.
6.8 However, the Government needs to give opportunity to genuine bidders to participate in maximum number of tenders to get competitive rates. The essential documents prescribed with this approach will have some minor errors (e.g. affidavits, unsigned documents, etc.) and if it is possible to meet such an error immediately, allow the bidders to meet such an error immediately before opening the trade envelope. If such errors could not be completed within this time, the tender should be disqualified.
6.9 Objections, if any, regarding the Technical Envelope of any tenderer shall be received in writing from such tenderer before opening the envelope' B' of the Trading Price after opening the Technical Envelope' A' during the tender process, in no case oral objections shall be entertained.
6.10 If the tenderer does not submit the required documents in the envelope" A" i.e. technical envelope, the tender should be disqualified. Since the envelope B of such tender is ineligible for opening, the tenderer's written or oral request to open the envelope B and consider the rates therein shall not be entertained under any circumstances.
6.11 If, after the opening of Technical Envelope A during the tender process, there are no objections from the tenderers regarding the Technical Envelope, the same shall be in writing as to the absence of objections from all eligible and ineligible tenderers. The complaint should be resolved and the price envelope should be opened.
6.12 No condition or option in the tender shall be given to the tenderer. Such bids should be rejected.
Page 23 of 9
# Page 10
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
6.13 If less than 3 bidders are found to have participated till the closing date of the tender period, the first extension of the tender process of at least 7 days should be granted. If less than 3 tenders are received, a second extension of 7 days should be given to submit the tender again. If less than three technically qualified bids are received even after the first tender or extension, a re-tender should be called for.
6.14 If more than three tenders are not received despite repeated tendering process and less than 3 but at least 1 tender is received despite two extensions given to the third re-tender, the next action of opening envelope A shall be taken by the Tendering Officer.
If the tenderer qualifies, he should open the envelope' Transport Rate' in front of the Divisional Commissioner and decide on the tender approval and convey the same to the government.
(7) Authority and Procedure for Tender Approval: In order to conduct the tender process in a transparent manner and to ensure fair price approval, the following Committees are being constituted.
7.1 District Level Committee: The District Level Committee shall be competent to approve tenders to the extent of 5% more than the total base price of both phases at the district level.
7.1.1 The composition of the District Level Committee shall be as follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 1. | the Collector                                        | Chairman    |
| 2. | the District Supply Officer/ Foodgrains Distribution |  Officer    | The Member Secretary |
| 3  | the District Treasury Officer                        | the members |
| 4  | the Deputy Regional Transport Officer                | the members |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.1.2 If the minimum tender received after the opening of the tender is more than 5% of the base rate of both the stages, the District Level Committee shall submit the proposal to the State Government Level Committee within one week with appropriate reasons.
7.1.3 The District Level Committee shall approve the tender within a period of one calendar month from the date of opening of tender, subject to a ceiling of 5% over and above the base price. If the decision is not taken within a month, the case should be submitted to the government.
Page 23 of 10
# Page 11
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
7.2 State Level Committee: The State Level Committee shall have the power to approve tenders where the rates are more than 5% of the base price.
7.2.1 The State Level Committee will be as follows:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 1. | the Principal Secretary, Anapuvagrasvi         | Chairman             |
| 2  | Deputy Secretary (NAPU-16A)                    | The Member Secretary |
| 3  | Financial Adviser and Deputy Secretary         | the members          |
| 4  | Deputy Secretary, Department of Finance        | the members          |
| 5  | Deputy Secretary, Department of Transportation | the members          |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.2.2 Before approving such rates, the State Level Committee shall obtain the report of the District Level Committee and shall study and decide the rates to be applicable in the given situation.
7.3 After three years, the District Level Committee shall have the power to approve the bids for the base rate and the State Level Committee for the higher rate, provided the base rate has risen/ fallen to a reasonable level for the district with the increase/ decrease in the wholesale price index for that year.
(8) Legality of Tender Rates: 8.1 The tenderer shall specify the rates in the tender taking into account all the provisions of the Government Decision. Any changes or requests will not be considered.
8.2 The tender documents of all the bidders shall remain valid for a period of 120 days from the date of opening of the tender.
8.3 However, in case of a court case arising out of this period, the time taken for the tender process shall be excluded.
(9) Guidelines for Negotiations: 9.1 Under no circumstances should negotiations be encouraged after competitive bidding. Negotiations send the wrong message to the market and can lead to doubts about the tender mechanism. Therefore, no tender should be negotiated with any bidder other than L-1. However, negotiations with L-1 tenderer can also be done only in the following circumstances.
9.1.1 If the rates are untenable or higher than the market prices, 9.1.2 if the bidders are suspected to have formed a cartel, 9.1.3 if it has not been possible to evaluate at least 3 valid commercial bids in the tender process.
Page 23 of 11
# Page 12
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
9.2 Negotiations should not be misused. Negotiating with L-1 bidders with questionable motives may result in delay in decision making. The recommending authority for negotiation must provide reasons that can be convincing. In any case, it should be ensured that the tenders are finalised within their validity period.
9.3 Negotiations shall be carried out by the full tender committee, not by these persons. Documents of the negotiation process should be preserved. The tenderer shall submit his negotiated offer in writing to the Tender Committee.
10.1 The approved tenderer is required to complete all the documents within 7 days of the approval of the tender and sign the contract in the prescribed format on a stamp paper of Rs.100/-.
10.2 All the provisions of this Government Decision shall apply to the contract entered into with the tenderer who has been approved by the tender process announced in accordance with this Government Decision. This should be mentioned in the contract.
10.3 In entering into an Agreement with the Tenderer. All the necessary terms and conditions of the draft agreement with the decision of the Government dated May 8, 2018 should be incorporated in the new agreement.
10.4 The agreement shall be signed by the Collector/ District Supply Officer and the contractor.
10.5 Every page of the agreement and at the place of amendment shall be signed by the Collector/ District Supply Officer and the transporter.
10.6 If the approved tenderer refuses to sign the contract within the stipulated time or fails to sign the contract, a fresh tender process shall be carried out by forfeiting the entire bid amount of such tenderer. In such re-tendering process, the first minimum bidder who refuses to sign the contract in the first tender shall be debarred.
10.7 However, in case the first tenderer is unable to conclude the contract within the stipulated time due to some technical reasons and the tenderer is ready to conclude the contract after completion of all the documents after the stipulated time but before the commencement of the new tender process, such tenderer shall be entered into the contract with such tenderer.
10.8 After submission of the tender, the tenderer shall be bound by the provisions of the tender as well as the contract. If the tenderer with the lowest rate refuses to sign the contract or does not work due to delay or order, the Government shall recover the additional amount to be spent by the tenderer along with the interest at the" Prime Lending Rate plus two per cent" of the State Bank of India.
Page 23 of 12.
# Page 13
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
(11) Duration and Extension of Contract: 11.1 The tenderer shall enter into a contract for transportation and handling with the tenderer for a period of three years whichever tender is finalised through the tender process. The date on which the contract will be signed with the tenderer. The contract will run for the next three years.
11.2 A new tender process should be initiated at least 3 months before the expiry of the contract period of 3 years.
11.3 Even after the expiry of the contract period, if the new contract cannot be fixed due to some unavoidable circumstances or due to a court case, the concerned Collector at the district level will have the right to extend the contract period up to 2 months.
11.4 If after the extended period of 2 months, it is not possible to finalize the contract for the next period due to some unavoidable reasons, the decision to extend the contract period till that period will be taken at the government level. The Collector should send a proposal to the Government in this regard.
The responsibilities of the District Supply Office after the approval of the tender:
12.1 TRANSPORT AND HANDLING After the tender is finalised, the routes for transportation of foodgrains shall be decided by the transporter. Traffic routes should be specifically earmarked for Phase-II/ Direct Traffic. Permits of ration shops on this route should be collected. A proper planning for this should be done by the supply office. The train will run at full capacity on a single route and all ration shops on that route should ensure that they are available.
Care should be taken to ensure that the management of routes and ferries is done in the best interest of the transporter and ultimately of the government.
12.2 In order to save on transportation cost, all the government godowns in the district should be transported from the nearest Food Corporation of India base depot. The district administration should get appointment from Food Corporation of India for the concerned godown from the nearest base depot.
12.3 The Food Corporation of India is responsible for weighing the foodgrains received from the base depot. In case the Contractor is forced to shift the weight to a private/ Government weight kata elsewhere on account of failure of the weight kata, the Food Corporation of India will be responsible for the additional expenditure on account of such shift. For this purpose, Section No. shall be carried out in accordance with 4.6.
12.4 If the vehicles provided by the Contractor are registered in a foreign State, the Contractor shall submit to the Collector the documents stating that the Transport Department has allowed the vehicles to be transported within the State of Maharashtra during the contract period and such documents are received.
Page 23 of 13.
# Page 14
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
Such vehicles should be allowed.
12.5 If the contractor does not pay the wages within the stipulated time, he should be given a written explanation at the first time. If they do not pay the amount within the stipulated time, the amount of wages should be deducted from the contractor's transport payment and deposited with the Mathadi Board.
12.6 All the terms and conditions of the Mathadi Board shall be applicable to the transporter organization for which the contract has been approved.
It will be mandatory for the Collector/ District Supply Officer to be registered as the main owner in Mathadi Mandal as per Mathadi Act. If the contractor violates the provisions of the Mathadi Act and the scheme, the principal owner shall comply with the provisions of the Mathadi Act as per the instructions of the Mathadi Board.
12.7 It shall be the responsibility of the concerned District Supply Officer to deposit the amount of levy declared by the District Mathadi Board for the Hamal workers registered with the Mathadi Board by the 15th of every month to the Mathadi Board through online mode or through Dhanakarsh.
12.8 The Mathadi Board is required to provide the benefits of social security and welfare schemes for the Mathadi workers as per the Mathadi Act and the following scheme from the amount of levy to be deposited with the Mathadi Board as per the provisions of the Mathadi Act. The District Supply Officer shall not pay the next month's levy to the Mathadi Board unless he has received a certificate from the District Supply Officer that the matter-wise expenditure has been appropriated from the amount of levy to be deposited with the Mathadi Board.
12.9 The Mathadi Board intends to deposit the salary of the porters online in their savings account. District Supply Officers will be responsible to ensure that action is taken accordingly and registered porter workers are not paid in cash.
(13) Responsibilities of the Contractor: 13.1 The Contractor shall write in bold letters on the vehicles to be used for transportation," Target Setted Public Distribution System Improved Grain Distribution System Government of Maharashtra."
13.2 Until the complete computerization of the Public Distribution System in the district is completed, the contractor will have to give green color to the vehicles (entire vehicle) under the control of the owner and install GPS system in the vehicles at his own cost. The facility of its control will have to be made available to the district supply office. Additional vehicles provided for transportation will also be required to be fitted with GPS system. The District Supply Office should select the officer responsible for controlling this GPS system and ensure that this control is done daily.
Page 23 of 14.
# Page 15
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
13.3 In the first stage of transportation, after the food grain is delivered to the government warehouse, the contractor will have to do the work of unloading the food grain in the warehouse, certifying it, packing the certified grain in the warehouse, unloading the grain from the warehouse bag for the second stage of transportation, packing it in the vehicle.
For both these types of work in the godowns, the Mathadi workers are paid wages as prescribed by the Mathadi Board and the inflation index applicable every year is given in Reference No. 8 here. It will have to be paid as per the government circular dated July 6, 2017. If any legal matter arises in this regard, the entire responsibility will be of the contractor.
13.4 Ration Distribution In the second phase of transportation, the contractor will be responsible for counting the grain to the shopkeeper and slapping the shop. He will have to bear the expenses. All these factors should be taken into consideration while finalising the tender. In the case of direct transport, the ration shopkeeper will have to arrange for a weight bar in the vehicle to measure the grain.
13.5 Allocation of foodgrains under Targeted Public Distribution System is received by the State from the Central Government. A few months later, an additional payment is made. With this, more/ less foodgrains will have to be transported every month as per the schedule of the district.
13.6 No foodgrains shall be transported by any other means or by any other means other than the nearest road certified for transportation of foodgrains. emergency situations (e.g.
In case of transport by alternative routes other than the planned route (flood, accident, local fair, agitations, etc.), the contractor will have to take written permission from the Collector.
13.7 If the Collector orders, he will also have to do the work of transporting food grains under other schemes of the government at the approved rates.
13.8 Even if the minimum carrying capacity (as per the carrying capacity revised from time to time) of the vehicles owned and controlled by the tenderer is fixed, it shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor to complete the transportation of foodgrains within the stipulated time and to provide additional vehicles, if required.
13.9 The Contractor shall be responsible for the losses incurred during the transportation and the amount of losses incurred shall be deducted from the monthly payment to the Contractor as per the rates prescribed separately.
13.10 The contractor shall not be appointed as a sub-contractor.
13.11 The contractor shall appoint a representative of his trust, a driver, a conductor, a porter and a driver's license holder.
Page 23 of 15
# Page 16
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
13.12 The Contractor shall be bound to comply with all the existing rules of the Government regarding the use of the vehicle and the load capacity of the vehicle, taxes of the vehicles, insurance, pollution, insurance of drivers, helpers, porters, minimum wages, etc.
13.13 The Contractor shall be solely responsible for the claims in the courts regarding compensation, wages, services etc. to be paid to the workers engaged for transport work under the Workmen's Compensation Act.
13.14 As the responsibility of handling the food grains in the godown is with the contractor, the responsibility of paying wages to the porters working in the godown at the rate of Mathadi Mandal as well as the price hike approved by the District Supply Office as per the inflation index in force in the month of March every year shall be with the concerned contractor.
Once the tender is approved, it has to be registered as an owner with the Mathadi Board.
If any legal matter arises in this regard, the entire responsibility will be of the contractor.
13.15 The contractor shall be obliged to deposit the wages of the workers registered in the warehouse by the 7th of every month in the Mathadi Circle through online mode or through money loan as per the provisions of the Mathadi Act.
13.16 Since handling of foodgrains in Government godowns falls under" essential service," the workers concerned shall not be able to disrupt the work in the form of strike/ cease work agitation etc.
The contractor agency/ Mathadi Board should take immediate action as per the provisions of the Mathadi Act for cancellation of registration of the worker who disrupts the work in this way. All liability shall be the responsibility of the parties. The district administration should also take necessary steps in this regard.
13.17 The Contractor shall be bound to strictly comply with the terms and conditions of the Mathadi Board Rules regarding the handling work in the warehouse during the contract period.
13.18 The contractor to be selected will have to register as an owner with the Mathadi Board before signing the contract, register the porters working directly in the government godown with the Mathadi Board and issue them identity cards.
13.19 The Mathadi Board should be requested to provide necessary porter workers so that there is continuity in the work of government godowns and they do not remain idle due to lack/ absence of porters. In case of non-supply of porters on record by Mathadi Board, it shall be the responsibility of the contractor concerned to provide temporary porters immediately.
13.20 It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to complete the process of registering the unregistered Mathadi workers with the Mathadi Board immediately.
Page 23 of 16.
# Page 17
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
(14) Payment of dues: 14.1 Though a combined tender process is being implemented for both the stages of transportation and handling of warehouses, the payments should be considered separately i.e. from the Food Corporation of India's base depot to the Government Grain Warehouse and from the Government Grain Warehouse to the Ration Shop and handling of foodgrains at the warehouse level. The contractor should submit the payment of transportation and handling work of both the phases to the District Supply Office within 15th of the next month after the end of the month.
14.2 Once the payments are made by the transporter, the Supply Office shall scrutinize the payments and make the payments within a maximum period of 7 days. If some documents need to be verified during the scrutiny, 70 per cent of the payment should be made by verifying the arrival of foodgrains on the basis of online entries and transport passes. If there are errors in the payments submitted by the contractor, all errors should be reported to them at once, avoiding repeated errors. Errors must be corrected immediately.
14.3 In case of delay in payment of dues when financial provision is available, the District Supply Officer and Assistant Accounts Officer of the District Supply Office shall be held responsible.
14.4 Payments should be made according to the approved rates of the stage of transportation for which the quintals have been transported.
14.5 Payments shall be made only after recovering income tax as well as all other government mandatory deductions from the contractor's payment as per the prevailing rules of the Central Government.
14.6 At the end of every week and at the end of every month, the warehouse keeper shall make available the L register to the contractor. If it is not done, action should be taken against them. After the contractor organization submits the payment of the tenant to the Tahsildar office, the Tahsildar office must submit the payment to the District Supply Office on the same day or the very next day. If action is not taken, the responsibility of the concerned employee and tehsildar should be fixed.
14.7 In the month of March of every year, when the price increase is calculated according to the inflation index, the monthly payments for the subsequent period will be released according to the increase in the price, for which the revision in the prices should be immediately reported to the concerned warehouse manager. The District Supply Officer will be responsible for ensuring that the payment of pawnshops generated every month will be presented with the increase in the inflation index and the pawnshop workers will get their wages with the increase in the inflation index.
Page 23 of 17
# Page 18
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
14.8 Ministry of Finance, Government of India. The provisions of section 194 (c) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 are applicable to all types of contracts as per para. No. 5.3 of the circular dated 08.10.1993.
Accordingly, the Financial Adviser and the Deputy Secretary vide Circular No. Ka- 1/398/7922, Dy. Income tax should be deducted from the payment of custodial work as on 9th December, 1996 as per the prevailing rules of the Central Government.
14.9 Income Tax Deduction Certificate (TDS) should be issued immediately to the contractor concerned.
15.1 Truck loading shall be done only after the driver submits an authorization letter on the letter head of the contractor to load the specified truck. The representative of the Collector and the warehouse manager/ godown keeper should verify the authenticity of the registration number on the truck number plate and the authorization letter in the prescribed format and the registration number of the truck on it.
15.2 The driver's license and the photograph on it should be carefully checked to ensure that the person appearing as the driver and the person mentioned in the authorization letter are the same.
15.3 The letter of authorization from the contractor should be filled in the prescribed format mentioning the above.
15.4.A letter of authority. As of September 1, 2018, the Government of. July 16, 2018 and d. As per the notification dated 6th August, 2018, the Commissioner of Transport, State of Maharashtra has issued a notification vide his letter D. The circular dated 21st August, 2018 prescribes in detail the modalities for improvement of vehicle load capacity. Accordingly, the maximum load capacity of the vehicles will be increased.
(16) Action to be taken in case of default of foodgrains by the contractor. 16.1 The Collector shall issue the D.O. for lifting of foodgrains every month within the prescribed time and at the earliest so that the lifting of foodgrains can be streamlined by giving sufficient time to the contractor to lift the foodgrains.
16.2 in this regard. For effective implementation of the supply chain management mechanism, the Government vide Circular dated 18th May, 2018 has prescribed the schedule of operations from Food Corporation of India to the distribution of foodgrains to the Fair Price Shops, as per which 100% distribution of foodgrains to the Fair Price Shops by the Food Week i.e. 14th of every month is to be ensured.
16.3 10% of the market value of the foodgrains lapsed due to non-lifting of foodgrains within the stipulated time will be recovered by the transport contractor as penalty. An inefficient transport contractor who wasted food grains more than 3 times in a year and failed to handle food grains at the warehouse level
Page 23 of 18
# Page 19
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
The district collector can take a decision to cancel the contract. The Collector should submit a detailed proposal to the government.
16.4 However, while taking such action, it should be carefully examined whether other factors are responsible for the wastage of foodgrains. For example, late issuance of lifting order (D.O.), non-receipt of foodgrains in time due to rake in base depot or other reasons, change of base depot in time, insufficient space in godown, non-delivery of foodgrains in godown on time, obstruction in delivery, etc.
(17) Ratio Rate Increase/ Rate Decrease as per Wholesale Price Index: 17.1 After finalization of foodgrain contracts by tender, the rate of increase/ decrease shall be proportionate to the Wholesale Price Index during the period of contract of transportation at the approved rate.
17.2 The proportionate increase/ decrease in the wholesale price index shall be calculated every year after a period of one year during the contract period.
17.3 Information on Wholesale Price Index is available at eaindustry. nic. in.
Only the official website should be used for this purpose.
17.4 The contract shall be based on the Wholesale Price Index for All Commodities for the month in which the contract is entered into.
17.5 Wholesale Price Index for All Commodities for the 13th month of the contract period should be taken.
17.6 The proportionate increase/ decrease in tariff as per Wholesale Price Index should be calculated as follows: Price increase/ decrease (WPI as per 17.5)/ WPI as per 17.4)/ 17.7. That is, if the transport contractor has been approved at the base rate, then from the 13th month, the base rate+ 0% rate will be applicable to it.
17.8 If there is a decrease in the above wholesale price index, then a minus percentage will be calculated as per the above formula. It should be done in that way.
17.9 In the subsequent year also, the rate of increase/ decrease shall be calculated on the original approved base rate using the above procedure and the rate of increase of base rate+ 0% shall continue to apply while providing for the same.
17.10 As per the said consideration, the Collector shall have full powers to increase/ decrease the rates at the rates approved by the transport contractor during the contract period.
Page 23 of 19
# Page 20
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
17.11 a In case the period of the scheme is extended for a period exceeding 3 years in case of emergency and exigency, the rate hike/ rate cut shall be applicable for the extended period as above.
(18) Prohibition of smuggling/ black marketing of foodgrains: 18.1 In addition to the list of vehicles owned and controlled by the contractor submitted at the time of signing the agreement, the Collector shall approve in writing the list of such vehicles with registration number if the contractor provides additional vehicles for transportation. Apart from such vehicles, the transport representatives should not load food grains in other vehicles.
18.2 If the food grains are transported in a vehicle other than the approved vehicle, it will be considered illegal and action will be taken against the concerned contractor, district transport representative and all concerned.
18.3 The Collector shall ensure that there is no malpractice by the contractor during the transportation of any foodgrains and other essential commodities under the Targeted Public Distribution System. If any news is published in newspapers, television or any other medium, then appropriate action should be taken immediately, the explanation should be sent to the newspaper and an objective report should be submitted to the government.
18.4 They shall be personally responsible for any fraud/ black marketing by the representatives of the transport contractor, drivers, conductors, porters etc. during the transportation and handling at the warehouse level. If they are found to be responsible, action should be taken against them as per the law and it will be mandatory for the contractor to remove them from work.
18.5 In case of smuggling/ black marketing of foodgrains and other essential commodities, the transport contractor or his representative, if found guilty directly or indirectly, shall be prosecuted under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the price of the seized foodgrains shall be recovered from the transporter at twice the market price. If such an incident is repeated for the second time, a case will be registered under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the amount will be recovered at three times the market rate. If it is repeated for the third time during the contract period, the Collector is of the opinion that it will be inevitable to cancel the contract of the transport contractor by registering a case against the concerned transporter under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.
18.6 The Collector should take special care to ensure that the warehouse rules are strictly followed in all the godowns so that there is no pilferage/ theft/ black marketing of food grains and other essential commodities.
On page 23 of 20
# Page 21
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
18.7 In case of smuggling/ black marketing of foodgrains and other essential commodities, the transport contractor should be booked under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and action should be taken to dispose of the seized items under Section 6 (a).
(19) Transport in case of emergency and urgency: 19.1 Transport and Handling If it is not possible to finalize the contract even after publishing the tender of the contract in the newspaper/ on the website of the Government of Maharashtra, then the transport should be arranged according to the following options.
19.2 Vehicles of other departments which may be available for transportation of foodgrains should be used, for which the Collector may approve the cost of fuel, vehicle rent etc. as per the procedure prescribed by the concerned department. It should be ensured that the fare charged for transportation is as per the rates prescribed by the concerned department. It should be ensured that the prescribed fare includes the cost of fuel, repairs, etc. and if this cost has been incurred, it has been deducted from the transportation charges.
19.3 Vehicles should be acquired and transport work should be done.
19.4 If the designated contractor is unable to carry out the work of transportation, then the transportation should be arranged through the available alternative. Care should be taken to recover the extra cost incurred for this alternative transportation from the unsuccessful contractor. In such a situation, the work of handling the godown should be done by the Collector's office.
(20) Disputes and Appeals in respect of the provisions of the contract: 20.1 The contractor may appeal to the concerned Divisional Commissioner against the decision of the Collector in respect of the provisions of the contract and penalty, recovery, etc., within 30 days from the date of the decision.
20.2 The decision of the Appellate Authority shall be final and binding on both the parties. The Contractor may appeal the provisions of the Contract within a maximum period of 6 months after the conclusion of the Contract.
20.3 If the Contractor is not satisfied with the decision of the Divisional Commissioner, he may appeal to the Government against the decision of the Divisional Commissioner within 30 days from the date of passing of the order.
20.4 The Contractor shall not be entitled to appeal to the Court unless he has exhausted the legal remedies available to him for the redress of his grievance.
(21) Scope and Implementation of the Government Decision: 21.1 This Government Decision shall apply to all tenders for transport and warehouse handling after the date of this Government Decision.
On page 23 of
# Page 22
Government Resolution No: Contract 1118/ No. 52/ No. 16-A
21.2 If a tender for transportation has been published in the meantime, but the process of submitting the tender has not been completed, the competent authority may cancel the tender published in such case and proceed to call for tenders as per the new government decision.
21.3 All foodgrains, sugar and other ration items to be delivered to ration shops shall be transported as per the rates approved in the contract signed after this Government decision.
21.4 The expenditure incurred on transport and warehouse level handling as per the contract rate should be considered for the budget.
(22) After the contract for the transportation and handling of foodgrains is signed, the information about the name of the appointed contractor, the rates approved, the copy of the contract, etc. should be submitted to the Government along with the copy of the contract within 15 days.
(23) In respect of the determination of foodgrain transportation contract. Informal Reference of the Department of Finance issued vide Government Resolution dated 20th April, 2017 No. 851/16/ Expenditure- 4, Sec. Similarly, as per the agreement dated 10.02.2017, regarding the finalization of Hamal Contract, a sum of Rs. On the basis of the approval of the Labour Department while issuing the Government Resolution dated May 08, 2018, an Informal Reference No. 99/-, Rs. This Government Resolution is being issued with the approval given as on 17/03/2018.
# Page 23