# Page 1
Guidelines for fixing contracts for transportation of foodgrains and other essential commodities to fair price shops under the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) under the Modified Foodgrain Distribution System.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection
Government Resolution No. 1120/ PR No. 106/ N.P. 16-A,
Hutatma Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg,
Ministry Extension, Mumbai- 400032
Date: January 15, 2021
Read:- 1) Government Resolution No. Shivap 1010/ No.198/ No. P. 28, p. February 23, 2012.
(2) Government Decision No. Contract 1012/ No.60/ No.16-A, D. 26th November, 2012.
(3) Government Decision No. Contract No.1016/ No.16-A, D. April 20, 2017.
(4) Government Decision No. Contract 1118/ No.52/ No.16-A, D. November 1, 2018.
(5) Government Decision No. Contract 1118/ No.52/ No.16-A, D. September 20, 2019.
(6) Government Decision No. Narrow 1116/ No.40/ No.16-A, Dy. 25th April, 2017.
Introduction: In order to bring more transparency at all stages under the Targeted Public Distribution System and to ensure regular and timely delivery of foodgrains to the beneficiaries, a revised Foodgrain Distribution System has been proposed in Reference No. 1 has been prescribed as per the government decision here. Under the new mode of transport, foodgrains are transported from the base depot of the Food Corporation of India to the ration shop through a single transporter across the district at government expense.
According to reference no. 2 and 3 respectively. November 26, 2012 and d. As per the Government decision dated 20th April, 2017, direct transport contracts have been operationalized in all the districts of the State, including in the Mumbai Thane Ration Circle and in the Municipal Corporations of Pune, Nashik, Nagpur, Aurangabad and Solapur.
With a view to streamline and speed up the work of transportation of foodgrains and handling of foodgrains at the government godown level under the targeted public distribution system in the State, the Government has decided to implement a unified tender process for transportation and handling at the godown level. 4 decision was made by the government.
As per the decision of the Government, the process of conducting tender process for fixing combined contracts of transport and handling was implemented in the districts where transport contracts were terminated. However, due to this decision of the government, the work of Hamal contractors in the government grain godowns is being stopped. The decision was challenged in the High Court. In view of this, the Government vide Reference No. 5 The decision of the Government hereby revoked.
Therefore, the issue of issuing guidelines for fixing transport contracts in the districts of the state as well as in the circles of Mumbai Thane Rationing Area was under the consideration of the government.
Government Decision: In the revised food grain distribution system under the targeted public distribution system, wheat, rice, pulses, sugar (other ration items as decided by the government from time to time) etc. will be transported as per the new transportation method and distributed to fair price shops in all districts and Mumbai Thane rationing area.
# Page 2
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
The government has decided to revise the guidelines for fixing transport contracts in the circles. Accordingly, the terms and conditions and guidelines for the tender process are prescribed as follows.
(1) Revised Transport System: 1.1 Direct transport:- Direct transport of foodgrains, sugar, pulses, etc. from the base depot of the Food Corporation of India to the ration shops at the headquarters of all the Municipal Corporations, Municipal Corporations and Taluks in the 5 Circles of the Mumbai-Thane Ration Zone.
1.2 Transportation of Phase-I: Transportation of foodgrains from Food Corporation of India base depots to Government grain godowns in remaining rural areas, except direct transportation in para 1.1.
1.3 Transportation of Rice (CMR), Coarse Cereals, Pulses or any other stock available from Base Depots other than regular Base Depots to Government grain godowns in the district as per instructions issued from time to time.
1.4 Transportation of second phase Except direct transportation, in the rest of the rural areas, foodgrains and other ration items are transported from the government grain warehouse to the ration shops and unloaded in the ration shops.
1.5 To carry out the responsibility of transportation as above, the perimeter and district-wise transportation contract will be determined.
1.6 In the district-wise contracts, transportation will be done directly to the headquarters of all the municipal corporations, all the municipalities and all the talukas in the district. While the remaining rural areas will be covered in two phases, a separate tender process will be carried out for the circles in the Mumbai Thane rationing area.
(2) Responsibility of conducting the tender process: 2.1 A tender process committee will be formed at the administrative division level to complete the process of inviting open e-tenders from the government level, conducting the tender process, etc. from the government level to determine the contract for transportation of food grains (including sugar and pulses) and other commodities under various schemes under the targeted public distribution system on behalf of the government:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| serial number                                          | designation                                                              | Committees responsibility |
| Joint Secretary (NAPU-16A), Anapuvagrasamvi            | Chairman                                                                 |
| Financial Adviser and Deputy Secretary, Anapuwagrasavi | The Member Secretary                                                     |
| 3                                                      | Regional Transport Officer (Mumbai Division)                             | the members               |
| 4                                                      | Deputy Controller, Rationing (Demand Branch) Mumbai Thane Rationing Area | the members               |
| 5                                                      | Deputy Commissioner (Supplies), Konkan Division                          | the members               |
| 6                                                      | Officer of the Chamber (NAPU-16A), Anapuvagransavi                       | the members               |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
An online portal will be selected by the tender process committee to execute the tender process. The process of scrutinizing the tenders will be done by the Office of the Financial Adviser and Deputy Secretary. If necessary, a group will be formed by the financial advisor and the deputy secretary.
Page 19 of 2
# Page 3
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
2.2 The agency providing the facility of online portal shall prepare the draft of online tender as per the provisions of the Government Decision and get it approved by the Tendering Processing Committee.
2.3 The selection of the agency providing the facility of the online portal, its remuneration, will be decided separately.
2.4 The Tender Processing Committee shall take action such as opening the technical envelope of the tender, scrutinizing the tenderer to determine the tenderer as technically qualified/ disqualified, forwarding the report to the State Level Committee, opening the rate envelope after the approval of the State Level Committee and submitting all the tender proposals to the State Level Committee for final approval.
2.5 After the approval of the Government of the draft of all district/ circle-wise separate tenders in the State, these tenders will be published on the portal identified by the Department.
2.6 The Collector/ Controller, Rationing will be responsible for signing the agreement with the approved tenderer within the stipulated time.
2.7 The Government shall have the right to accept or reject the tender or part of the tender of the District/ Circle for any reason. The government's decision in this regard will be final.
2.8 Even if the tendering process is carried out at the government level, the responsibility of implementing and controlling the targeted public distribution system in the respective areas will remain with the Collector and the Controller of Ration Distribution as before.
(3) Tender Procedure: 3.1 As per the instructions of the General Administration Department's Government Decision No.Mants/ Nasti 2012/ PR No. 273/39, dated November 26, 2014, for open tenders, similarly, the Department of Industry, Energy and Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor and Employment, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Labor, Ministry
Implementation of open e-tendering process as per the provisions of the Government Resolution dated December, 2016.
3.2 The opening of the technical envelope of the tender, the technical qualification of the tenderer, the opening of the price envelope, etc. should be carried out under the guidance of the Tender Processing Committee.
3.3 A photocopy of this Government Decision should be made available along with the tender form.
3.4 After the publication of the tender, before the submission of the tender, a pre-bid conference should be held with the interested bidders and their doubts should be resolved by giving details of the terms, conditions and work to be done in the tender to the tenderer. The date of this meeting should be mentioned in the advertisement while publishing the tender.
3.5 Be sure that the tender gets wide publicity.
3.6 The tender documents shall provide information about the Food Corporation of India's prescribed base depot for the district, the distance of the government godowns in the district from these base depots, the average distance and in case of unavoidable circumstances, the distance from the possible base depots other than the regular base depots, the distance from where the CMR rice, sugar or coarse cereals have to be brought from the adjacent or probable (based on the actual transportation in the last three years) district to the government grain godown, the monthly allocation of the district and the number of vehicles required for the first phase transportation and the number of vehicles required for the second phase transportation, etc.
3.7 Even if the transportation of Government warehouses has been planned at the district level, the tenderer should be given a clear idea of the transportation of the tenderer from any base depot for the district to any Government warehouse in the district. In case of transportation during the contract period, the demand for additional payments will be considered.
On page 19 of 3
# Page 4
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
No. Considering these, the tenderer has to pay the tender price.
3.8 For the second phase, the list of taluk-wise ration distribution shops, their average distance from the government warehouse, the total monthly allocation of all ration distribution shops and the number of vehicles required for this, etc. should be made available to the tenderer.
(4) Base Rates for Tendering: 4.1 The base rates per quintal of transportation fixed for tendering as per the mode of transportation shall be as follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Mode of transport                                                                                                                                                                     | Base Rate (Rs. per quintal) | Percentage of the tenderer's rates (combined for all stages of transportation) |
| 1                                                                                                                                                                                     | 2                           | 3                                                                              |
| (a) Direct traffic in the Mumbai-Thane rationing area                                                                                                                                 | Rs. 87.00 for full distance | (+/-) percent                                                                  |
| (b) Direct transport to all the Municipal Corporations, Municipalities/ Councils and Taluk Headquarters at the district level and two-phase transport to the rest of the rural areas. | Rs. 112.00 for whole        | A later                                                                        |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.2 When the situation arises for transporting sugar pulses or other ration from the government granaries to the ration shops i.e. in the absence of the first phase of transportation, half of the approved per quintal rate will be admissible.
4.3 Reference No. 6 to the Government Decision on the consideration of traffic breakdowns is being superseded and no traffic breakdowns will be permissible during regular traffic.
4.4 While accepting bids at rates lower than the base price, it shall be mandatory for the tenderer to submit financial justification as to how the tenderer can afford to work at lower rates.
The final decision will be taken by the state committee.
4.5 Since the combined per quintal rates for the first and second phase have been proposed, the transporter will have to operate the transport directly, as and when required, the government will be able to give instructions for direct transport to the places where the two-phase transport is going on.
4.6 While publishing the tender process, the average distance of the first and second phase as well as the direct traffic of the concerned district/ circle area should be specified and highlighted in the tender notice. In case of unavoidable circumstances, if the allocation is made from a base depot other than the regular base depot or if the transportation has to be done from another district and therefore the distance transported is more than the average distance of the first phase of the district, then half of the percentage increase in the distance as compared to the average distance, should be given in the approved per quintal rates. If the same situation arises for the second phase of transportation, that is, if the transportation from the godowns other than the regular government grain warehouse to the ration shops is done and therefore the distance is more than the average distance of the second phase, then half of the percentage increase in the distance will be given in the approved per quintal rates.
On page 19 of 4
# Page 5
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
4.7 The decision of the Government regarding the average distance of traffic and the consequent increase in fares shall be final.
(5) Terms and Conditions of Eligibility of Tender: The tenderer shall pay the tender price after considering the following factors while making the tender.
5.1 Work Experience: The tenderer should have experience of working in Government/ Semi-Government food grain transportation for at least one financial year out of the last 5 consecutive financial years. The work experience of the tenderer is 33% of the work done in the last 3 years in the district/ circle in which he is filing the tender. It should have a ton of power. The experience should be in the name of the person in whose name the tender is being filed.
5.2 The work experience mentioned in the above paragraph 5.1 is required to be the experience of working in Government/ Paramilitary transport under the Doorstep Scheme or other similar schemes of the Central/ State Government. In order to take into account the experience of transportation work in the Central Government, State Government and Paramilitary Organizations, copies of the order of all these works and the experience certificate of the competent authority will have to be submitted.
5.3 Financial implication: The tenderer's total minimum financial outgo on transportation for the period of time shown in paragraph 5.1 above shall be 33% of the total expenditure on transportation in the district/ circle in which he is filing the tender, during the last 3 years.
5.4 The cost of the tender form will be Rs.10,000/-.
5.5 ISARA MONEY: 5.5.1 The tender should be accompanied by an amount equal to 3% of the total transportation cost of the district/ circle for the last 3 years.
5.5.2 The fee should be paid online.
5.5.3 Those who have paid the Isara amount are obliged to pay the tender, if they do not pay the tender, their entire amount of Isara should be forfeited.
5.5.4 The tenderer who pays less than the specified amount shall be disqualified and the entire amount paid shall be forfeited.
5.5.5 The tender notice should clearly state in whose name the amount is to be paid.
5.5.6 After the opening of the tender, all eligible/ ineligible bidders, except the lowest bidder, shall be refunded within one month.
5.5.7 No interest will be paid on the amount.
5.5.8 If the amount is not returned within two months, 10% interest will be payable on the delay and the full amount of interest will be recovered from the concerned officer/ employee responsible for the delay.
5.5.9 If the following is not fulfilled by the tenderer, the amount of the tender shall be forfeited.
1) Withdrawal or modification of tender or offer after the last date of acceptance of tender, 2) Non-signing of contract,
Page 19 of 5
# Page 6
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
3) Not paying the security deposit required for the performance of the contract after the tender or offer has been accepted, 4) Not fulfilling any other conditions before signing the contract as specified in the tender document.
5.6 Bank Guarantee: 5.6.1 A back guarantee should not be taken with a tender. Provided that the reserve amount equivalent to 5% of the total transportation cost of the previous three years in the district/ circle before the tenderer whose tender has been approved by the tenderer shall be paid by the bank guarantee remaining valid during the contract period in any scheduled/ nationalized bank. 5.6.2 Verification of Bank Guarantee The authenticity of the bank guarantee should be verified by the bank concerned.
5.6.3 Ensure that the Bank Guarantee remains valid for the entire duration of the contract.
5.6.4 The Bank Guarantee shall be deposited within 15 days from the date of approval of the tender. The government will have the power to extend the deadline in certain circumstances.
5.7 Amount of Security Deposit: 5.7.1 An amount equal to the amount of the Issue shall be deposited as security deposit by the tenderer whose tender has been approved.
5.7.2 No interest shall be payable on the amount of security deposit.
5.8 Bank guarantees and security deposits should be used in the following circumstances:
5.8.1 Recovery of expenses incurred for alternative transportation in case of sudden stoppage of transportation and handling work by the transport contractor.
5.8.2 If there is no other way left to recover the penalty imposed on the transport contractor.
5.8.3 If the contract of the transporter has ended but there is some inflow, recovery from him, if there is no other way to recover it, then the same amount should be recovered from the security deposit and bank guarantee.
5.9 Aggregate Carrying Capacity of Essential Vehicles Owned and Controlled by the Tenderer: Considering the monthly allocation of the district and approximately 25 working days in a month, it will be mandatory for the tenderer to have the same carrying capacity of the vehicle owned and controlled by the tenderer as the monthly allocation divided by 25 days= as much allocation.
5.10 In case of partnership firm/ society, co-operative society/ firm/ private organization (under the Companies Act), the vehicles must be in the name of the partner/ director/ member.
5.11 If the tenderer is a private firm/ proprietary firm, the vehicles submitted along with the tender must be in the name of that private person.
5.12 Vehicles having a carrying capacity equal to the sum of the carrying capacity of the owned vehicles and the carrying capacity of the vehicles under control, as determined for technical qualification, need not be separate vehicles under control, if they are owned by a partnership firm/ cooperative society/ private person.
5.13 Regarding the ownership and control of the vehicles to be submitted with the tender and the entire
Page 19 of 6
# Page 7
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
A certified certificate from the competent transport authority (RC Book with Fitness Certificate) regarding suitability for the contract period should be attached with the tender.
5.14 The vehicles owned and controlled to be submitted along with the tender shall be required to submit an undertaking to the tenderer that the goods which affect the quality of foodgrains to be transported later shall not be transported during the contract period as per the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
5.15 Organizations/ individuals whose contract has been terminated due to the inability of the transport contractor before the completion of the contract in the case of government/ semi-government work in the last 5 consecutive years will not be eligible for the tender process.
5.16 The bidders whose Ishara amount/ Security Deposit has been forfeited by the Government/ Semi-Government Department in the last 5 consecutive years shall not be eligible for tendering. However, if they can submit satisfactory documents in this regard, the tender process committee can take a decision on their eligibility.
5.17 Bidders who bid in more than one district or circle on the basis of documents
If such bidders become minimum bidders at more than one place, they will have to provide additional self-owned and controlled vehicles of the same capacity to the bidders at the remaining places, except the bidders at one place, within seven days.
5.18 in the districts. As per the Government decision dated 08.05.2018, the transporter is not required to bear the airfare in all the districts where Hamal contracts are in operation or where new base rates of Hamali have been introduced. Therefore, while tendering for a conveyance contract, the bidder should not include the cost of conveyance in the tender price.
5.19 The tenderer should take into account that the first phase of transportation of transporter may be affected in the districts where rice is produced.
(a) The method of tendering:
6.1 The tendering procedure shall be carried out by adopting the e-tendering procedure as per the Government Decision No. Matts/ Nasti 2012/ Q. No. 273/39, dated 26th November, 2014 of the General Administration Department.
6.2 The Government will select one of the various portals available for the same.
6.3. Dual LIFA system will be adopted for traffic tenders. The first envelope will be a technical envelope containing proof of eligibility of the tenderer and signed documents confirming acceptance of the terms and conditions of the tender. The second envelope' B" will be the tariff envelope in which the bidder will declare his rates.
6.4 No conditional rates will be accepted in the tender.
6.5 Considering the amount of the tender, the Department of Industry, Energy and Labor The tender process period should be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the Government Decision dated December 1, 2016.
Page 7 of 19
# Page 8
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
6.6 The following documents are to be submitted in Technical Envelope A (Technical Envelope).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A.A.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | List of documents                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Transport Business Registration Certificate/ Shop Act License of the prescribed authority.                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Partnership Deed and Certificate of Institution Registration and Rules in respect of Private Institution (under Companies Act)/ Partnership Firm/ Co-operative Society                                                                                               |
| 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Certification under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Copies of the certificate of the competent authority, work order, contract, showing the work experience of the tenderer.                                                                                                                                             |
| 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Certified audit reports and Chartered Accountancy records of the relevant financial years showing the financial strength of the tenderer which should clearly mention the working of the Government/ Paramilitary Transport.                              |
| 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Attested copies of Income Tax Returns for the last 5 years of the tenderer                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Certified copies of RC book and fitness certificate of vehicles owned and controlled under the Road Transport Act, 2007 and 2011 (issued by the competent authority).                                                                                                |
| 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Statement showing the number of vehicles owned, their capacity and ownership etc. against the carrying capacity mentioned in the tender. Affidavit that these vehicles will be made available for the entire contract period (on stamp paper of Rs.100/-) |
| Statement indicating the number of vehicles under control, their capacity and ownership etc. against the carrying capacity mentioned in the tender. Affidavit that these vehicles will be made available for the entire contract period (on stamp paper of Rs.100/-) |
| 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Proof of deposit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Affidavit of acceptance and adherence to all the provisions, terms and conditions of the Government Resolution (on a stamp paper of Rs.100/-)                                                                                                             |
| 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Attested copy of the tenderer's PAN card                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Attested copy of GST Registration Certificate of the tenderer                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | The tender form, with the signature of the tenderer                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Affidavit showing that the contract has not been terminated for any reason before the conclusion of the contract in respect of Government/ Paramilitary works during the last 5 consecutive years (on a stamp paper of Rs.100/-)                          |
| 16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Affidavit showing that the amount of Isara/ Security Deposit has not been forfeited by the Government/ Semi-Government Department for the last 5 consecutive years (on a stamp paper of Rs.100/-)                                                         |
| 17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | A certified copy of the certificate of credit in accordance with paragraph R.5                                                                                                                                                                            |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 8 of 19
# Page 9
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
6.7 The original copies of all the documents in the list of documents mentioned above shall have to be submitted by the tenderer for verification as per the instructions of the Tendering Committee, otherwise the tenderer shall be disqualified.
6.8 The Government needs to give opportunity to genuine bidders to participate in maximum number of tenders to get competitive rates. Keeping this in view, if there are any errors in the prescribed essential documents and such errors can be rectified immediately, the bidders should be allowed to rectify such errors within one week before opening the price envelope B. If such errors are not completed within the stipulated time, the tender should be disqualified.
6.9 Objections, if any, regarding the Technical Envelope of any tenderer shall be received in writing from such tenderer before opening the Technical Envelope' A' after opening the Price Envelope' B' during the tender process, in no case oral objections shall be entertained.
6.10 The tender shall be disqualified if the tenderer does not submit the required documents in the envelope' A" i.e. technical envelope within the prescribed period. Since the rate envelope' B" of such tender is ineligible to be opened, the tenderer's written or oral request to open the rate envelope' B" and to consider the rate therein shall not be entertained under any circumstances.
6.11 If, after the opening of Technical Envelope A during the tendering process, there is no objection from the tenderer regarding the Technical Envelope, the same shall be in writing as to the absence of objection from all the eligible bidders. The complaint should be immediately resolved and the price envelope should be opened.
6.12 No condition or option shall be given to the tenderer in the tender. Such bids should be rejected.
6.13 If less than 3 qualified bidders are found to have participated till the closing date of the tender period, the first extension of the tender process of at least 7 days shall be granted. If less than 3 tenders are received, a second extension of 7 days should be given to submit the tender again. If less than three technically qualified bids are received even after the first tender or extension, a re-tender should be called for.
6.14 If more than three qualified bids are not received despite two rounds of tendering and less than 3 but at least 1 qualified tender is received after two extensions given to the third re-tender, further proceedings for opening of envelope A shall be taken up at the Government level.
(7) Authority and Procedure for Tender Approval: The State Level Committee shall have the power to give final approval to the tenders finalised by the agency executing the tender process.
7.1 State Level Committee: 7.1.1 The State Level Committee shall consist of the following members.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 1                                               | the Secretary, Anapuvagrasavi                         | Chairman             |
| 2                                               | Joint Secretary (NAPU-16A)                            | the members          |
| 3                                               | the Controller, Rationing and Director Civil Supplies | the members          |
| 4                                               | Financial Adviser and Deputy Secretary                | The Member Secretary |
| 5                                               | Deputy Secretary, Department of Finance               | the members          |
| 6                                               | Deputy Secretary, Department of Transportation        | the members          |
| Deputy Commissioner (Supplies), Konkan Division | the members                                           |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 9 of 19
# Page 10
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
7.1.2 The State Level Committee shall study the tender proposal in detail and thereafter approve the final tenders.
(8) Legality of Tender Rates: 8.1 The tenderer shall specify the rates in the tender keeping in view all the provisions of the Government Order. Any changes or requests will not be considered.
8.2 The tender documents of all the bidders shall remain valid for a period of 120 days from the date of opening of the tender.
8.3 However, in case of a court case arising out of this period, the time taken for the tender process shall be excluded.
(9) Guidelines for Negotiations: 9.1 Under no circumstances should negotiations be encouraged after competitive bidding.
Negotiations send the wrong message to the market and can lead to doubts about the tender mechanism. Therefore, no tender should be negotiated with any bidder other than L-1. However, negotiations with L-1 tenderer can also be done only in the following circumstances.
9.1.1 If the rates are untenable or higher than the market prices, 9.1.2 if the bidders are suspected to have formed a cartel, 9.1.3 if it has not been possible to evaluate at least 3 valid commercial bids in the tender process.
9.2 Negotiations should not be misused. Negotiating with an L-1 bidder with questionable intent can result in a delay in decision-making. The recommending authority for negotiation must provide reasons that can be convincing. In any case, it should be ensured that the tenders are finalised within their validity period.
9.3 Negotiations should be conducted by the entire tender committee and not by individuals. Documents of the negotiation process should be preserved. The tenderer shall submit his negotiated offer in writing to the Tender Committee.
10.1 After receiving the approval of the Government, the approved tenderer is required to complete all the documents within 7 days after the approval of the tender and sign the contract in the prescribed format on a stamp paper of Rs.100/-.
10.2 All the provisions of this Government Decision shall apply to the contract entered into with the tenderer who has been approved by the tender process announced in accordance with this Government Decision. This should be mentioned in the contract.
10.3 The agreement must be signed by the Collector/ Controller Ration/ District Supply Officer/ Deputy Controller Ration and the tenderer.
10.4 Every page of the agreement and at the place of amendment shall be signed by the Collector/ Controller of Ration/ District Supply Officer/ Deputy Controller of Ration and the tenderer.
10.5 If the approved tenderer refuses to sign the contract within the stipulated time or fails to sign the contract, a fresh tender process shall be carried out by forfeiting the entire bid amount of such tenderer. In such re-tendering process, the first minimum bidder who refuses to sign the contract in the first tender shall be debarred for one year.
10.6 However, in case the first tenderer is unable to conclude the contract within the stipulated time due to some technical reasons and after the stipulated time but before the commencement of the new tender process, all the documents should be completed.
Page 19 of 10
# Page 11
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
If at least the tenderer is willing to enter into an agreement, an agreement should be entered into with such tenderer.
10.7 After submission of the tender, the tenderer shall be bound by the provisions of the tender as well as the contract.
If the tenderer with the lowest rate refuses to sign the contract or does not work due to delay or order, the Government shall recover the additional amount to be spent by the tenderer along with the interest at the" Prime Lending Rate plus two per cent" of the State Bank of India.
(11) Duration and Extension of Contract: 11.1 The tenderer shall enter into a contract for transportation for a period of three years. The period of contract shall be for a period of three years from the date on which the agreement is entered into with the tenderer.
11.2 If the new contract cannot be fixed even after the expiry of the contract period due to some unavoidable circumstances or due to a court case, the concerned Collector/ Controller, Rationing Department at the district level will have the right to extend the contract period up to 2 months.
11.3 If after the extended period of 2 months, it is not possible to finalize the contract for the next period due to some unavoidable reasons, the decision to extend the contract period till that period will be taken at the government level. For this, the Collector/ Controller of Ration, should send the necessary proposal to the government without any delay.
(12) Responsibilities of District Supply/ Controller Rationing Office after approval of tender: 12.1 After finalization of the transport tender, the transport contractor shall be assigned the routes for transportation of foodgrains. Traffic routes should be specifically earmarked for Phase-II/ Direct Traffic. Permits of ration shops on this route should be collected. A proper planning for this should be done by the supply office. It should be ensured that the train runs at full capacity on a single route and all ration shops on that route are available to them. Care should be taken to ensure that the management of routes and ferries is done in the best interest of the transporter and ultimately of the government.
12.2 In order to save transportation cost, transportation to all Government godowns/ fair price shops in the district should be done from the nearest Food Corporation of India base depot. The district administration should get appointment from the Food Corporation of India for the concerned godown from the nearest base depot.
12.3 The Food Corporation of India is responsible for weighing the foodgrains received from the base depot.
In case the transport contractor is forced to shift to a private/ government weigh kite due to non-availability of weigh kite, the Food Corporation of India shall be responsible for the additional expenditure on account of such trips. shall be carried out in accordance with 4.6.
12.4 If the vehicles provided by the transport contractor are registered in a foreign state, the transport contractor shall submit to the Collector the documents confirming that the transport department has granted permission to transport the vehicles in the state of Maharashtra during the contract period and shall confirm that such documents have been received and allow the use of such vehicles.
On page 19 of 11
# Page 12
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
12.5 It shall be the responsibility of the concerned godown owner to vacate the vehicles loaded with foodgrains in the government godown within 24 hours (excluding holidays). If the grain in the vehicle that came to the government grain warehouse is not unloaded within 24 hours, then it will be charged per May for the grain in the vehicle. The District Supply Office will be responsible for the penal recovery of Rs 50/- per tonne.
Immediate action should be taken against those responsible.
12.6 In addition to the list of vehicles owned and controlled by the contractor submitted at the time of signing the contract, if the contractor provides additional vehicles for transportation, the list of such vehicles should be published on the official website of the district from time to time after approving the list in writing along with the registration number of such vehicles. The Deputy Controller Rationing will also be able to process the sanction of additional vehicles for the Mumbai Rationing Zone.
12.7 Suggestions for implementation of Supply Chain Management Mechanism: The Department has taken various initiatives for effective implementation of Supply Chain Management Mechanism with a view to ensure timely supply of foodgrains to the beneficiaries. The guidelines have been issued vide circular dated 18th May, 2018. It has come to the notice of the Government that these instructions are not being implemented seriously by the District Supply Offices/ Taluk Supply Offices/ Controller/ Deputy Controller/ Rationing Offices.
12.7.1 All District Supply Officers/ Controllers of Ration should receive the Distribution Order (DO) from Food Corporation of India in the first week of the month preceding the month of appointment (at least one month in advance). The process should be completed in the previous week and the lifting should be started immediately. (e.g. the delivery order for lifting of January quota must have been received on 1st December, for which the amount of January quota must be deposited with Food Corporation of India in the last week of November.
12.7.2 All District Supply Officers/ Controllers of Ration Distribution shall ensure that by 20th of the month preceding the month of allocation, the entire allocation from FCI is lifted and deposited in the Government godowns of the district.
12.7.3 Rationing Offices/ Taluk Supply Offices should complete the process of collecting the permit amount from the ration shopkeepers by the 20th of the month preceding the month of appointment.
12.7.4 Paragraph No. 12 of the Government Decision dated 23rd February, 2012. As per section 3 (1), directions have been issued to divide the taluks zone-wise and determine the traffic routes accordingly and plan the traffic accordingly. However, the district administration is yet to implement the decision. Therefore, the second phase of transportation is not planned properly. The above issue No. After the completion of the process, the second phase transport passes should be distributed to the transporters every day from the 21st of the month preceding the month of appointment and the traffic should be operational. While issuing transport passes, it should be ensured that they are made zone-wise.
12.7.5 100% distribution of foodgrains to all ration shops should be completed by 7th of the month.
Page 19 of 12
# Page 13
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
12.7.6 In the case of direct transport, the procedure for on-road inspection of vehicles and distribution of transport passes should be prescribed without forcing the vehicles to be brought from the base depot of Food Corporation of India to the Rationing Offices/ Taluk Supply Offices.
12.7.7 Disciplinary action should be proposed against the District Supply Officers/ Deputy Controller Rationing/ Tehsildars who do not distribute the food grains as per the above schedule.
(13) Responsibilities of the Transport Contractor: 13.1 The transport contractor shall write in bold letters on the vehicles to be used for transportation," Target Setted Public Distribution System Improved Grain Distribution System Government of Maharashtra."
13.2 Until the complete computerization of the Public Distribution System in the district is completed, the contractor will have to give green color to the vehicles (entire vehicle) owned and controlled by him and the vehicles will have to install GPS system at their own cost. The facility of its control will have to be made available to the district supply office. The temporary additional vehicles provided for transportation will not be required to be painted green, however, it will be mandatory to have a GPS system installed. The District Supply Office should create a control room in the District Supply Office to control this GPS system, for which a responsible officer of the rank of Assistant District Supply Officer should be selected and ensure that this control is done daily.
13.3 Ration Distribution In the second phase of transportation, the transport contractor will be responsible for counting the grain to the shopkeeper and slapping the shop. He will have to bear the expenses. All these factors should be taken into consideration while finalising the tender. In the case of direct transport, the ration shopkeeper will have to arrange for a weight bar in the vehicle to measure the grain.
13.4 Allocation of foodgrains under Targeted Public Distribution System is received by the State from the Central Government. A few months later, an additional payment is made. With this, more/ less foodgrains will have to be transported every month as per the schedule of the district.
13.5 Foodgrains shall not be transported by any other means or by any other means other than the nearest road certified for transportation of foodgrains. emergency situations (e.g. In the event of flooding, accidents, local fairs, agitations, etc.), the contractor will have to take written permission from the Collector/ Controller of Ration if the transportation has to be done through an alternative route other than the planned route.
13.6 If the Collector orders, he will also have to do the work of transporting food grains under other schemes of the government at the approved rates.
13.7 Even if the minimum carrying capacity (as per the carrying capacity revised from time to time) of the vehicles owned and controlled by the tenderer is fixed, it shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor to complete the transportation of foodgrains within the stipulated time and to provide additional vehicles, if required.
13.8 The Contractor shall be responsible for any loss incurred during transportation.
13.9 The Contractor shall not appoint a Sub-Contractor.
13.10 The contractor shall appoint a representative of his trust, a driver, a conductor, a porter and a driver's license holder.
Page 19 of 13
# Page 14
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
13.11 The Contractor shall be bound to comply with all the existing rules of the Government regarding the use of the vehicle and the load capacity of the vehicle, taxes of the vehicles, insurance, pollution, insurance of drivers, helpers, porters, minimum wages, etc.
13.12 The Contractor shall be solely responsible for the claims to be filed in the Court regarding the compensation, wages, services etc. to be paid to the workers engaged for transport work under the Workmen's Compensation Act.
13.13 The Government is planning to use state-of-the-art technology to prevent grain pilferage/ leakage, which includes measures such as installing GPS systems with Geo mapping, installing load cell systems, implementing supply chain systems, etc. According to the government's instructions, it will be mandatory for the transporter to install the necessary equipment on the vehicles, which will have to be installed by the transporter at his own expense.
13.14 Food Corporation of India (FCI) shall be solely responsible for loading and unloading of foodgrains from the FCI Base Depot into the vehicle of the Contractor.
No extra cost (vaarai etc.) will be borne by the transport contractor for this.
(14) Payment of dues: 14.1 Although the combined tender process is being carried out for direct transportation/ two-phase transportation at the district level, while considering the payments, the base depot to ration shop prescribed for direct transportation and the base depot to government grain warehouse and government grain warehouse to ration shop prescribed for both-phase transportation. The contractor should submit separate payments for direct transportation/ double transportation to the District Supply Office within 15th of the next month after the end of the month.
14.2 Once the payments are made by the transporter, the District Supply Officer/ Deputy Controller Rationing shall complete the scrutiny of these payments within 7 days. On completion of the scrutiny, the original payments for final approval and disbursement should be submitted to the Office of the Financial Adviser and Deputy Secretary along with the recommendation and the prescribed certificate.
14.3 If any documents need to be verified during the scrutiny, proposals for payment of 70% of the payment should be submitted to the Office of the Financial Adviser and Deputy Secretary after verifying the arrival of the food grains on the basis of online entries and transport passes/ toll plaza receipts.
If there are errors in the payments submitted by the contractor, all errors should be reported to them at once, avoiding repeated errors. Errors must be corrected immediately.
14.4 Payments should be made on PFMS system as per the approved rates of the stage of transportation for which the quintals have been transported.
14.5 Payments shall be made only after recovering income tax as well as all other government mandatory deductions from the contractor's payment as per the prevailing rules of the Central Government.
14.6 GST will not be applicable to carriers transporting foodgrains under the Targeted Public Distribution System.
14.7 Ministry of Finance, Government of India. The provisions of section 194 (c) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 are applicable to all types of contracts as per para. No. 5.3 of the circular dated 08.10.1993. Accordingly, the Financial Adviser and the Deputy Secretary vide Circular No. Ka- 1/398/7922, Dy. The income tax should be deducted as per the existing rules of the Central Government as on December 9, 1996.
14.8 Income Tax Deduction Certificate (TDS) should be issued immediately to the contractor concerned.
Page 19 of 14
# Page 15
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
15.1 Truck loading shall be done only after the driver submits an authorization letter on the letter head of the contractor to load the specified truck. The representative of the Collector and the warehouse manager/ godown keeper should verify the authenticity of the registration number on the truck number plate and the authorization letter in the prescribed format and the registration number of the truck on it.
15.2 The driver's license and the photograph on it should be carefully checked to ensure that the person appearing as the driver and the person mentioned in the authorization letter are the same.
15.3 The letter of authorization from the contractor should be filled in the prescribed format mentioning the above.
15.4.A letter of authority. As of September 1, 2018, the Government of. July 16, 2018 and d. As per the notification dated 6th August, 2018, the Commissioner of Transport, State of Maharashtra, has issued a notification to the effect that the The circular dated 21st August, 2018 prescribes in detail the modalities for improvement of vehicle load capacity. Accordingly, the maximum load capacity of the vehicles will be increased.
(16) Action to be taken in case of default of foodgrains by the contractor. 16.1 The Collector/ Controller, Rationing Department shall issue the D.O. for lifting of foodgrains for the month in any case 40 days in advance so that the contractor gets sufficient time to lift the foodgrains and the lifting of foodgrains can be done smoothly.
16.2 Detailed instructions in this regard are given in para.
16.3 10% of the market value of the foodgrains lapsed due to non-lifting of the foodgrains in the first stage of transportation or during the time prescribed for direct transportation shall be recovered by the transport contractor as penalty.
16.3.1 In case of non-delivery of foodgrains in the second phase of transportation by 7th of the month and maximum by 14th of the month, 10% of the market value of the foodgrains not reaching the ration shops will be recovered by the transport contractor as penalty.
16.3.2 In both the above cases, the Collector/ Controller may take a decision to cancel the contract of the inefficient transport contractor who is found to be wasting food grains more than 3 times in a year. The Collector/ Controller, Rationing Department should submit a detailed proposal to the government with suitable reasons.
16.3.3 However, in the course of such proceedings, the expiry of the grain shall be deemed to be a violation of the provisions of paragraph No. The factors such as late issuance of D.O., non-receipt of foodgrains in time due to rake or other reasons in the base depot, timely change of base depot, insufficient space in the godown, not unloading the foodgrains in the godown on time, obstruction of the custodian, non-delivery of permits on time, etc. should be carefully examined and penal action should be taken.
(17) Ratio Rate Increase/ Rate Decrease as per Wholesale Price Index: 17.1 After finalization of foodgrain contracts by tender, the rate of increase/ decrease shall be proportionate to the Wholesale Price Index during the period of contract of transportation at the approved rate. For this, the following actions should be taken:
17.2 The proportionate increase/ decrease in the wholesale price index shall be calculated every year after a period of one year during the contract period.
17.3 Information on Wholesale Price Index is available at eaindustry. nic. in. Only the official website should be used for this purpose.
Page 19 of 15
# Page 16
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
17.4 The contract shall be based on the Wholesale Price Index for All Commodities for the month in which the contract is entered into.
17.5 Wholesale Price Index for All Commodities for the 13th month of the contract period should be taken.
17.6 The proportionate increase/ decrease in the wholesale price index should be calculated as follows:
Rate Increase/ Rate Deduction= 16.5 as per WPI- 16.4 as per WPI 100 X% 17.7 Thus, the transport contractor should be given a rate increase of X% of the approved rate. That is, if the transport contractor has been approved at the base rate, then from the 13th month, the base rate+ 0% rate will be applicable to it.
17.8 If there is a decrease in WPI, then the minus percentage will be obtained by considering the above formula.
It should be done in that way.
17.9 In the subsequent year also, the increase/ decrease in the base rate should be considered on the basis of the original approved base rate using the above methodology.
17.10 As per the said consideration, the Collector/ Controller Rationing and Director Civil Supplies, Mumbai shall have full powers to increase/ decrease the rates at the rates approved by the transport contractor during the contract period.
17.11 In case of extension of contract period for more than 3 years in case of emergency and exigency, the rate hike/ rate cut shall be applicable for the extended period as above.
(18) Prohibition of smuggling/ black marketing of foodgrains: 18.1 In addition to the list of vehicles owned and controlled by the contractor submitted at the time of signing the agreement, if the contractor provides additional vehicles for transportation, the list of such vehicles with registration number shall be approved in writing by the Collector/ Controller, Rationing Department/ District Supply Officer/ Deputy Controller Rationing Department. Apart from such vehicles, the transport representatives should not load food grains in other vehicles.
18.2 The District Supply Office shall prescribe a time schedule as to when the vehicle should reach at least the prescribed Government Grain Warehouse or Ration Distribution Shop after the grain is loaded from the Food Corporation of India Base Depot, if the vehicle does not reach the desired place without a joint reason, the matter should be immediately brought to the notice of the transport contractor.
18.3 If the food grains are transported in a vehicle other than the approved vehicle, it will be considered illegal and action will be taken against the concerned contractor, district transport representative and all concerned.
18.4 The Collector/ Controller, Rationing Department shall ensure that there is no misappropriation by the contractor during the transportation of any foodgrains and other essential commodities under the targeted Public Distribution System. If any news is published in newspapers, television or any other medium, then appropriate action should be taken immediately, the explanation should be sent to the newspaper and an objective report should be submitted to the government.
18.5 They shall be personally liable for any fraud/ black marketing by the representatives of the transport contractor, drivers, conductors, porters etc. during the course of transportation. If they are found to be responsible, action should be taken against them as per the law and it will be mandatory for the contractor to remove them from work.
Page 19 of 16
# Page 17
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
18.6 In case of smuggling/ black marketing of foodgrains and other essential commodities, if the transport contractor or his representative is found to be directly/ indirectly guilty, a case under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 shall be registered against the concerned and the price of the seized foodgrains shall be recovered from the transporter at twice the market price. If such an incident is repeated for the second time, a case will be registered under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the amount will be recovered at three times the market rate. If it is repeated for the third time during the contract period, the District Collector/ Controller, Rationing Department is of the opinion that it will be inevitable to cancel the contract of the transport contractor by registering a case against the concerned transporter under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and if it is found that the contractor is responsible in all these three cases, the proposal with such detailed explanation should be sent to the government for further action.
18.7 The Collector/ Controller, Rationing Department should take special care that the warehouse rules are strictly followed in all the godowns so that there is no pilferage/ theft/ black marketing of food grains and other essential commodities.
18.8 In case of smuggling/ black marketing of foodgrains and other essential commodities, the transport contractor should be booked under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and action should be taken to dispose of the seized items under Section 6 (a).
(19) Transport in case of emergency and urgency: 19.1 If it is not possible to finalize the contract even after the tender of the transport contract has been published in the newspaper/ on the website of the Government of Maharashtra, if the transport contract has been cancelled, the transporter has become inefficient or if the situation has arisen to make alternative transport arrangements due to any other reason, then the transport should be arranged in the following order.
19.2 The Transport Contractor working in the adjoining district/ circle, if he is willing to work at the rate of work in the district/ circle in which the transport is to be carried out, shall submit a detailed proposal to the Government for its approval.
19.3 The Transport Contractors working in the districts/ circles of the Revenue Division, if they are willing to work at the rate of work in the district/ circle in which this transport is to be carried out, should submit a detailed proposal to the Government for its approval.
19.4 The proposal for the rates obtained by calling for the tariff papers should be submitted to the approval of the Government. However, the terms and conditions of the government order will continue to apply.
19.5 Vehicles should be acquired and transported at the rate prescribed by the District Level Committee.
19.6 If the designated contractor is unable to carry out the transportation work, then the transportation should be arranged through any of the above available options. The extra cost incurred for this alternative transportation should be recovered from the unsuccessful contractor.
(20) Disputes and Appeals in respect of the provisions of the Contract: 20.1 During or after the term of the contract, any dispute relating to the provisions of the contract as well as penalty, recovery, etc.
Against the decision of the Collector/ Controller, Rationing, the contractor can appeal to the concerned Divisional Commissioner within 30 days from the date of the decision.
20.2 If the Contractor is not satisfied with the decision of the Divisional Commissioner, he may appeal to the Government against the decision of the Divisional Commissioner within 30 days from the date of passing of the order.
Page 17 of 19
# Page 18
Government Resolution No. 1120/ Contract No. 106/ No.P.S. 16-A
20.3 The decision of the Appellate Authority shall be final and binding on both the parties.
The Contractor may appeal the provisions of the Contract within a maximum period of 6 months after the conclusion of the Contract.
20.4 The Contractor shall not be entitled to appeal to the Court unless he has exhausted the legal remedies available to him for the redress of his grievance.
21.1 This Government Decision shall apply to all tenders for transport contracts issued after the date of issue of this Government Decision.
21.2 All foodgrains, sugar and other ration items to be delivered to ration shops shall be transported as per the rates approved in the contract concluded in accordance with this Government decision.
21.3 The expenditure on transport as per the contracted rate shall be considered for the budget.
(22) After the contract for the transportation of grain is signed, the information about the name of the appointed contractor, the approved rate, the copy of the contract, etc. should be submitted to the government along with the copy of the contract within 15 days.
(23) This Government Decision is based on the informal reference of the Finance Department No. 2735/ Expenditure-10, D. The said Government Resolution is being issued with the concurrence accorded vide Consent dated 14th December, 2020.
# Page 19