# Page 1
I
Minimum in trading season 2024-25
Under the Basic Price Purchase Scheme
About Paddy / Millets Procurement...
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1124 / P.No.160 / No. P. 29
Martyr Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032.
Date: 14 / 10 / 24.
Read: -
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection, Government Decisions, No. Purchase-1115 /
No.17 / No.29, D. 14.01.2016.
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection, Government Corrigendum, No: 1014/28 Q. No.17 / Blue-
29, D. 03.11.2017.
3. State Government to Central Government for procurement of Paddy under Decentralized Procurement Scheme.
Memorandum of Understanding. (MOU)
4. For the purchase of Sun 2024-25. Chaired by the Minister (Anapu & Grasan)
Meeting Chronicles Purchase 1123 / Q. No. 160 / Blue 29, dated 10.10.2024
The Proposal: -
The Minimum Support Price (MSP) procurement scheme is a central government scheme and provides a guarantee to farmers.
This scheme is implemented so that grains do not have to be sold at a discounted price (distress sale).
For this, through agent agencies appointed by the state government (in non-tribal areas, Maharashtra).
State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Mumbai and in the Tribal Sector, Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribal Development
Corporation, Nashik) Procurement of Fair Average Quality (FAQ) Paddy and Millets in the State.
is done. Paddy procured under the above scheme earlier in the season 2016-17
Custom Milled Rice (CMR) from millers through agent agencies.
Raw rice) was being deposited with the Food Corporation of India. The Centre
Decentralized Procurement Scheme in the State for procurement of "Paddy" by the Government
Scheme-DCPS) from the marketing season 2016-17 taking into account the recommendations made for implementation.
The State Government has decided to implement the Decentralized Procurement Scheme throughout the State vide Reference No. The government of 1
The decision has been taken. Hence, the CMR (raw rice) generated in the scheme is State.
It is being deposited in godowns designated by the government. According to the Sun 2024-25
The issue of issuing instructions for procurement of paddy and millets during the season was under the consideration of the government.
# Page 2
I
The Government's Decisions:
In the marketing season 2024-25, the Central Government under the Minimum Support Price Procurement Scheme provides for the procurement of paddy and
Minimum Support Price for Millets (Jowar, Millet, Maize and Ragi) -
MSP) have been announced. In addition, from the point of view of benefitting the farmers at the base prices and
Control room at the state level to ensure that food grains are not sold below the guaranteed price (de-risse sale).
Instructions have been given by the central government to open. Accordingly, minimum support to farmers in the state
To set up procurement centres in and around the state for the purpose of price benefit.
The following orders are issued for the purchase of millets: Sorghum, Millet, Maize, Ragi
They are: -
1) Decisions regarding the purchase: -
Food Corporation of India as the "Nodal Agency" of the Central Government throughout the State of Maharashtra.
(Food Corporation of India) will work.
1.2 Since the State Government is to act in coordination with the Food Corporation of India,
Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Mumbai and Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribal Federation
Development corporation limit. Nashik should act as the chief agent of the state government.
Process of physical procurement in non-tribal areas "Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing Federation,
Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribal Development Corporation Limited in Mumbai "and Tribal Areas." ,
Nashik "should be done through these agent agencies.
1.3 Uniform Specification Centre for Procurement of Foodgrains and Millets
From the government. 13.09.2024 have been received by mail. the said Directive
The bets will apply for the season 2024-25. (Appendices V to XI)
1.4 All types of procurement levels of millets, millets, maize and ragi
The main agent agencies will be responsible for the proceedings.
Barley, millet, maize, and ragi are cereals produced by the Food Corporation of India.
On behalf of the state government, it should be stored in the godowns. In the state government warehouse
The concerned Collector / District Supply Officer before storing the millets.
Check the quality.
1.6 The grains of jowar, bajra, maize and ragi are procured once and stored in the government godown.
Storage of such grains after quality check and weighting of millets.
Maintenance, intra-district transportation / decongestion, etc.
The responsibility will rest with the concerned Collector / District Supply Officer.
1.7खर Paddy (Paddy) produced by the agent agencies in their own godowns or as required.
It should be stocked and stocked in a rented warehouse. These Rental Warehouses
The nearest distance from the government godowns will be storage and transportation.
Agents should make sure they are qualified to do so. the Central Government
By crushing the paddy as per the prescribed instructions (as per the instructions and other terms and conditions).
Fortified Rice / CMR Government as per the directions of the Government / District Collectors
# Page 3
I
Deposit in the warehouses (of the District Supply Officer). Near Paddy Purchase Centre
Storage, transportation from the procurement center to the crushing center, safety, crushing and rice
The entire responsibility of depositing in the government godowns will remain with the agent agencies.
2) Appointment of Agent: -
In accordance with the above decision, the following agent agencies shall be appointed in the State: -
2.1 In the Bigger Tribal Areas - In Marketing Season 2024-25, Minimum Support Price
For procurement of Paddy / Millets under the Scheme, Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing
The Federation, Mumbai (Mocking Federation) is the main agent under this order of the agency.
That is why it is being appointed. The agent agency made the purchase in the area.
Care should be taken to carry out the proceedings within the prescribed time frame.
In the 2.2आद Residential Area - Minimum Support Price Purchase in Marketing Season 2024-25
Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribal for procurement of Paddy / Millets under the Scheme
Development Corporation, Nashik (Adivasi Development Corporation) is the agent agency of
is being appointed as the chief agent under the order. the agency of the said agent or
Care should be taken to ensure that the procurement process in the area is carried out within the stipulated time frame.
3) Base price, general quality and standard: -
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Crop             | Base price (Rs.)   | Amount to be provided to farmers (Rs.) |
| Paddy / Rice     | Normal (एफ.ए.क Q.) | 2300                                   | 2300 |
| "A" grade        | 2320               | 2320                                   |
| Millets          | Sorghum (hybrid)   | 3371                                   | 3371 |
| Jowar (Maldandi) | 3421               | 3421                                   |
| millet           | 2625               | 2625                                   |
| Maca             | 2225               | 2225                                   |
| angry            | 4290               | 4290                                   |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Those who fit the input prescribed by the Central Government in the Minimum Support Price Procurement Scheme
Paddy / coarse grains need to be procured. Graders trained by agent agencies accordingly.
Paddy / millets should be purchased only after inspection. Paddy rejected after inspection /
Feedback is reported every 15 days by the District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager.
submitted to the government. Procurement of low-quality paddy / millets leading to some fiscal deficit
The agent agency is solely responsible for any problems that occur or otherwise arise.
will remain.
Quality Check of Paddy / Millets by the Government (in the Office of District Supply Officer)
Quality control will be done by trained personnel). In inspection at the time of purchase or storage
# Page 4
I
The agent agency will be solely responsible for any quality defects found. In addition to this
Corrective action in the case must be taken by the agent agency itself and such action has resulted in
Agents will be solely responsible for the damages.
4) Humidity: -
Humidity in excess of the prescribed by the Central Government for the marketing season 2024-25
Paddy / coarse grains should not be purchased if found. Too wet in any case, or
Don't buy moldy rice / millets. Millets are clean and dry and marketable.
Agents should verify that they are. having a higher humidity than the recommended amount
In case of purchase of paddy / millets, the agency agencies shall take appropriate action against the concerned in a timely manner.
The report should be submitted to the government.
5) General Terms and Conditions: -
If 5.1.खर: -
5.1.1म Planning of Paddy / Millets Procurement by Catering Federation / Tribal Development Corporation expeditiously
should be implemented. Opening of Shopping Centres at required places, with trained staff.
Appointment, drying, cleaning of grains at the shopping center and not allowing the grain to be wasted.
The basic facilities required for this and for the smooth procurement process (sieve, fans,
Necessary tools such as tarpaulins, polythene sheets, etc., necessary weight measurements, humidity gauges, etc.
Precautions to be taken to make the machines (Moisture meters, gunny bags, twine, etc.) available at the shopping centre
Both should be taken by purchasing agent agencies.
5.1.2क Grains at procurement centres in areas under the Agricultural Produce Market Committee
Drying, cleaning and non-perishable grains and smooth procurement process.
The basic amenities required to be made (sieve, fans, tarpaulin, polythene sheets)
Necessary tools like, necessary weights, humidity meters, etc.
the responsibility of making available through the Agricultural Produce Market Committee (BARDAN, SOLD, etc.)
Both purchases will be from agent agencies. Areas under the Agricultural Produce Market Committee.
Details of the Shopping Centres functioning as well as the materials supplied to these Shopping Centres.
The procurement centre-wise details should be submitted by the agent agencies to the government.
5.1.3खर Necessary to control the quality of paddy / coarse grains to be grown
Mocking the entire responsibility of hiring the equipment (Image Analysis Kit) and adequately trained graders.
To ensure that the Federation / Tribal Development Corporation remains in place.
The Collector should do it. Procurement agents who do not meet FAQ standards
Purchase of paddy / millets (i.e. paddy, jowar, millet, maize and ragi).
The entire liability and the liability for the damages incurred shall rest with the purchasing agent.
On such employees / graders if they try to purchase low quality paddy / millets
The agent agencies should take punitive action.
5.1.4आध Paddy / Millets procurement as MSP procurement scheme is for the benefit of farmers
In doing so, the government should follow the procedure in serial number 7 of this decision.
# Page 5
I
2.2 Purchase of Baradana: -
5.2.1क Government-to-Government (Executive Branch - 16B,
Anapu & Gram Sanjeeva, Mantralaya, Mumbai) at District / Taluka level Warehouses / Shopping Centres
will be made available.
If there is not an adequate supply of new jute gunpowder from the central government, both agents
The institutions will be provided with a new round-the-season gunny bag by the government (Karyasana Blue-16B).
Anapu and Grahasamis, Mantralaya, Mumbai) will be made available as per the directions of the Central Government.
The gunny bags will be made available at the procurement centres through the bidders.
5.2.3म New gunpowder station received from the Jute Commissioner after the end of the previous marketing season
The government 18.05.2017 and d. As indicated in the letter from 13.12.2018, the ongoing kharif marketing
Accounting for the left over gunpowder for the season 2024-25
d. Paragraphs with 13.12.2018 Circular. Both the agents in the return in 1 (Annexure XII)
Organizations should submit to the government (Karyasana Blue-16B, Anapu & Gramsavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai).
5.2.4क Instead of new gunny bags due to shortage of jute gunny bags as per the instructions of the Central Government
If required, the agent agencies shall take the approval of the Government and apply to the millers /
Both the agent agencies have asked the government to use the gunpowder from the farmers and account for it.
(Karyasana Blue-16B, Anapu and Grahasnavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai).
In the 5.2.5पणन season 2024-25, the agent agencies need old gunny bags to purchase paddy.
Provided by the Government (Karyasana Blue-16B, Anapu & Grahasini, Mantralaya, Mumbai).
It will come.
5.2.6त New gunny bags to be used for collection of pulses and paddy as directed by the Central Government
New and old gunny bags will be purchased for paddy. Gathering with the Millers
The gunpowder is returned from the millers as it is frequently used.
The policy regarding the receipt or collection of the amount from the government.
will be determined and reported separately.
5.2.7 The amount of gunpowder that the agent agency previously recovered from the payment to the millers
If so, the amount should be deposited with the financial advisor and the deputy secretary's office. As well as such
Cardamom Account / Details submitted to Karyasana Blue-16B, Anapu & Grasshopper, Mantralaya, Mumbai
Do it.
For 5.2.8भरड rice, the grain counts must be standardized when giving the grain to millers. such as this
Paddy should be given to millers by test weighting of standard 10% bales. During the inspection
Disciplinary action against the concerned officer / staff if the marks are found to be not authenticated.
Action should be taken. The control in this regard is vested in the managers of both the agent agencies.
The directors have to do it.
5.2.9अभ Taxpayers arrive at the point of purchase with "A" grade rice in English.
The capital letter "A," and the letter "C" on a basket of common grade rice.
Make a mocking.
# Page 6
I
The gunpowder that was once used to buy the 5.2.10ध is used again to buy the paddy.
It should not be moldy, cracked, broken, or scratched. It also has a capacity of 50 kg.
The weight of the gunny bag should not be less than 500 grams. If found at the time of any such inspection
The agent agency should take immediate action against the officer / employee responsible.
This should also be controlled by the managing directors of both agent agencies.
The use of gunny bags for procurement of 5.2.11ध n / CMR and millets is regulated by the Central Government. 13.12.2018
Follow the instructions in the letter. In addition, the Central Government may from time to time issue circulars regarding the
As per the instructions received, Karyasana Blue-16B, both by Anapu and Grasnavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
Agents should give the agencies the necessary instructions.
New and old gunny bags received at the 5.2.12खर centre along with records of their use
It will be mandatory for the shopping centers to take it on the portal of NeML / BeAM. The two agencies
Parents should be monitored at their level and a monthly report should be made as required.
Both agent agencies will be responsible for submitting to the government.
5.3 Publications: -
5.3.1खर Only purchase of minimum support price at the centre without setting a bar on the purchase price
Information about the quality, offers, shopping centres, etc. under the scheme should also be displayed.
The instructions have been translated into Marathi and Hindi for the farmers to understand for sure.
It should be done.
5.3.2एफ .AQ quality standards, shopping period, etc. Highlighting each shopping center on the board
should be displayed on the facade.
These boards showing 5.3.3दर, status, shopping centres, all Agricultural Produce Market Committees, Gram Panchayats,
To be installed on the facade of tehsil office, panchayat samiti office, etc.
Strict instructions should be given by the District Collector to all concerned.
In any case, non-FAQ grade grains will not be procured.
FAQ of paddy / millets local for essentials like input, base price, etc.
Extensive publicity by agent agencies and district collectors through newspapers and other media.
The action comes from the administrative expenses paid to the subagent agencies.
The District Collector concerned should ensure this.
5.3.5खर Adequate publicity regarding these centres and the names of the villages attached to each shopping centre.
Collectors and purchasing agent agencies should be careful about giving.
5.3.6र Brought to the shopping center after the shopping center closes in the evening, but not purchased
It is widely reported that the responsibility of maintaining the paddy / millets will remain with the concerned farmers.
Give it.
5.4तप is: -
5.4.1भ Officials of the Food Corporation of India / State Government visit the procurement centres regularly.
Check whether the purchase is being made in the prescribed manner and the advice given by them.
# Page 7
I
With this in mind, the purchasing agent agencies should take appropriate corrective action / measures accordingly.
It will be necessary. Also submit the completion report to the officer as well as the government.
Agencies will be obligated to do so.
Paddy / coarse cereals supplied under 5.4.2खर are not as per the Uniform Specifications, unless
The State Government team will have the power to refuse paddy / millets. as well as
The state government will also take the help of a third party for quality check as per the requirement.
It can.
5.4.3ज The District Magistrate has constituted a Quality Control and Monitoring Team during the paddy / coarse grains procurement period.
should be set up. Non-FAQ grade paddy / millets through special drive by this team
Disciplinary action against officers and staff responsible for procurement
The report should be submitted to the government. CCTVs will also be installed at paddy procurement centres.
CCTV recording should be made available on demand.
5.4.4प According to previous experience, it has been observed that shopping centers in the state are located outside the state.
Paddy is brought for sale. Thus, in any case, the paddy of a foreign state
The District Collector should form a team so that they do not come for sale in the state.
If such incidents are noticed, appropriate action will be taken by the concerned team.
The report should be submitted to the government.
5.4.5ज Paddy / coarse cereal bags, as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time.
The District Supply Officer shall check whether the quantities are in accordance with the prescribed standards.
Agents must be accompanied by representatives of the organization. Records at the Shopping Center
should be preserved. Those who do not meet the central government's standards on gunpowder in this investigation
If gunshots are seen, they should be discarded. Also the gunpowder centre provided by the tenderer.
If it is found that the government does not meet the standards regarding gunpowder
To the notice of the tenderer / Government (Executive Branch - 16B, Anapu & Grasnavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai)
They should be brought and replaced by the concerned. Low-quality gunpowder will be used
No, agent agencies should take care of this. Such complaints have been received by the government.
If necessary, a committee will be constituted at the government level to investigate the matter.
to be carried out and the action taken by the agent agencies on the basis of that inspection report.
The agencies will be obliged to submit the report to the government.
5.4.6दक Inspection report by SIT / District level officers every week
Submission to the government will be mandatory.
5.5इतर: -
The 5.5.1उप agents should be appointed by the main agent agencies on their own responsibility.
The district collector should not issue authorization letters to the deputy agents. with the appointment of the Deputy
It should be noted that there will be no direct government involvement.
The Maharashtra Procurement of Agricultural Income (Regulation) Rules, 1963
Under Rule 32 (d) of the Central Government Minimum in the area of Agricultural Produce Market Committee.
# Page 8
I
Purchased at a lower price than the guaranteed price announced under the base price scheme.
The market committee needs to be careful not to go. According to the "Market Committee
If such acts are not curbed, they shall be proceeded against under Rule 45 of the aforesaid Rules.
The government can take appropriate action. "The matter is being taken up by the respective District Collectors in their respective areas.
Agricultural income should be brought to the notice of market committees. Under the Minimum Support Price Scheme
Plaques showing declared grain quality, prescribed inputs and prices in bold
The District Collector should give strict instructions to the Agricultural Produce Market Committees for planting in the area and
It should be strictly implemented by the market committees.
Make sure that the transaction is not below the guaranteed price.
5.5.3प As per prior experience in the area of Agricultural Produce Market Committee at a price lower than the base price
The Central Government asks the State Government for reasons in respect of the purchase made and
Most such purchases are non-FAQ in nature when the disclosure is sought.
Paddy / coarse grains appear to have been sown. However, such low-priced purchases
The Agricultural Produce Market Committees inform the concerned about the purchase and sale rates regarding the transactions.
Without specifying the FAQ / non-FAQ status at the time of submission / submission of the report.
In most cases, correspondence from the central government to the state is done because of the supply.
Therefore, any market committees may purchase paddy and millets in their area.
Rates when published or communicated through any medium, in addition to the purchase and sale rate
It is also advisable to mention FAQ and non-FAQ standards.
The district collector should give the agricultural produce in his area to the market committees.
Maharashtra to procure Paddy, Jowar, Millets, Maize and Ragi under the Basic Price Scheme
State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Mumbai and Tribal Development Corporation, Nashik.
Contingent Expenditure Temporary approved by the Central Government for Kharif Marketing Season 2024-25
Provisional cost sheet will be paid.
Deficit / reduction in Millets and Paddy procured under the scheme in 5.5.5वर was acknowledged by the Central Government.
So, accordingly case wise it will be permissible.
6) Shopping centers: -
6.1खर The selection of the centre and procurement agency is as follows under the chairmanship of the Collector:
The committee is being constituted: -
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A. No. | Members of the Committee                                                                      | the post of          |
| 1      | the Collector                                                                                 | The President's      |
| 2      | the District Superintendent Agriculture Officer                                               | The member's         |
| 3      | District Sub-Divisional Cooperative Societies                                                 | The member's         |
| 4      | the District Supply Officer                                                                   | The member's         |
| 5      | District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager (depending on the respective geographical area) | the Member-Secretary |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Page 9
I
6.2 Out of the Shopping Centres operating in the previous Marketing Season, there were no complaints in the previous Marketing Season.
Shopping centres should continue in the marketing season 2024-25. Complaints about such shopping centers
Agent agencies should make sure they don't.
6.3 Agent inquiring into complaints received about old shopping centres
With self-explanatory feedback such as allowing / disallowing shopping centres by institutions
Proposals should be submitted to the above committee. After a thorough investigation of the case, the committee
A decision should be taken to allow institutions to set up shopping centres. Taken up
Let the government know about the decision.
Agent agencies with their self-explanatory feedback for starting a 6.4नव shopping centre
Proposals should be submitted to the above committee. After a thorough investigation by the committee in the case, such institutions
A decision should be taken to approve the opening of shopping centres. About the decision
The government should be informed.
6.5सम Total received for procurement under Base Price Scheme in the district
List of procurement agencies, list of agencies approved by the committee, rejected by the committee
The list of institutions should be reported to the government. Submit a list of approved institutions
Shopping malls and newly approved shopping malls operating during the previous marketing season
A list should be submitted with such explicit references.
6.6 Increase in Shopping Centres as per requirement taking into account the purchases made in the previous season
The committee should also decide on what to do.
6.7 Paddy procurement centres to be contracted with selected paddy procurement centres.
Storage capacity and the objective given to them should be included.
6.8. Food Corporation of India, Headquarters. For the shopping center under the 14.03.2022 letter
The required checklist has already been issued. Purchase according to
The actual procurement of paddy / millets in season 2024-25 commences in the current season before commencement of procurement.
Whether or how the existing Paddy / Millets procurement centres meet the Central Government norms
This should be investigated.
Complete information about PCSAP (Procurement Centre Self-Assessment)
There are instructions from the central government regarding filling up on the portal). Accordingly, in Annexure XIII,
The agent is responsible for uploading the information of all the shopping centers on this portal as per the instructions.
There will be institutions. The technical support required for this is from NeML / BeAM.
should be given. This information is coordinated with the sub-agent agency as well as the Food Corporation of India.
It should be filled.
The main agent agencies, in accordance with the 6.10य, also from their level to select the subagent agencies.
Terms and conditions should be defined.
# Page 10
I
7) Method of purchase: -
Each village should be connected to a specific shopping centre. Shopping centers and each shopping center
The names of the villages that have been added, and the District Collector to give adequate publicity in this regard, and
Purchasing agent agencies should be on the lookout.
List of farmers by area and area of villages connected to procurement centres by Talathi
Receive it and record it in the register at the shopping center. More than one village
If connected to the same shopping center, keep a separate register at such a center.
The register should be made available to the district supply officers at the time of the procurement centre inspection.
The farmer of any village within the Taluka limits according to his wish.
Paddy can be sold at any shopping centre. Accordingly, for the sale of paddy at the Paddy Procurement Centre.
Registered farmers should be registered in the register at the procurement centre. Sadar
The register should be made available to the district supply officers at the time of the procurement centre inspection.
7.2 Online mode of procurement was introduced for paddy / coarse grains from farmers.
For this, it will be necessary to register the farmers concerned. online for it.
Registration, Aadhaar number and savings bank account number are being registered. the Central Government
Under the scheme, farmers will be given 3 new minimum threshold parameters.
Online registration is an Aadhaar authentication method.
It should be used. The Aadhaar authentication machines required for this
Authentication Devices) is the main responsibility of making available to all shopping centres.
Agents will remain agencies.
NeML / BeAM, NCDEX Group for online shopping marketing season 2024-25
PFMS records as per the directions of the central government by registering on the company's platform.
It is mandatory to be connected to the (Public Fund Monitoring System).
7.4खर In order to avoid crowding at these centres, farmers should visit the procurement centres to maintain law and order.
Advance notice must be given before arrival. Under this scheme, SMS is sent to the farmers on their mobile phones.
Pre-notification should be provided (from the NeML / / BeAM portal).
Under the 7.5वन Rights Act, 2005, leases are held in respect of land in forests.
While procuring paddy from farmers, the area under paddy / coarse cereals crop on this holding area shall be
Records, as well as 7/12 reference records, required documents regarding liens, etc.
The online registration of such farmers will be done within the stipulated time by certifying it by the Collector.
Action should be taken.
Holders of forest lands available with the Collector
List of farmers who cultivate paddy on tenant land
The list of such farmers has been prepared by the District Supply Officer with the approval of the Collector.
It should be made available to both the respective agent agencies, and NeML / BeAM.
NeML / BeAM has launched an online portal for such farmers to purchase paddy online.
Such facilities should be made available.
# Page 11
I
Also, the support of the farmers while purchasing paddy from these farmers at the procurement centers.
It is mandatory to authenticate and take a live photo. Accordingly, action will be taken against the shopping centres.
This needs to be taken care of by the agent agencies.
7.6 While procuring paddy produced on the lands of Devasthanas / Agricultural Corporations, which
Devasthanam / Agriculture of farmers on whose lands paddy is produced by the farmers.
Paddy crop on Lease Agreement with Corporation, 7/12
These things need to be checked. Also, these farmers' paddy procurement centers
Aadhaar authentication of farmers and taking a live photo is mandatory while purchasing paddy.
Accordingly, the agent agencies need to ensure that the procurement centres are prosecuted.
7.7खर As per the paddy / coarse grains brought by the farmers for sale at the centre,
Online entries should be made on the NeML / BeAM portal. A self-registration is also being prepared.
These include 1) the farmer's name, 2) the name / group number and area, and 3) the one sold at the center.
The information should include paddy / jowar, millet, maize, and ragi. So, again, the grain
The farmer who brought the earlier 7/12 extract from this registry was taken out as soon as it was brought.
It can be ensured that the grain is of its own production. Rock or similar
Paddy / Millets Related Before Receipt of Paddy / Millets Brought By Vehicle
Make sure it is completely owned by the farmer.
7.8 Very large, regardless of area under grain and average productivity, anywhere
It has been observed that grain is purchased in bulk (indirectly by traders).
Hence, the farmers' 7/12 area under cultivation, this year's crop situation (per capita)
Considering the average yield of the crop, paddy / millets should be procured.
7.9. District-wise limit of per hectare productivity by the concerned District Collector District Superintendent of Agriculture
Receive from authorities and make available to agent agencies and NeML / BeAM.
The agent is careful not to purchase more than this limit under any circumstances.
institutions to take. If the purchase exceeds this limit, the agent is responsible.
There will be institutions. Inform the government immediately if such a purchase is noticed.
Come.
The purchase of paddy by traders / brokers / middlemen is being done at the procurement centres.
the purchase of paddy / coarse grains under the scheme, if noticed, or in any manner
Such Shopping Centres if cases of fraud / misappropriation / misappropriation are noticed and
The agent agencies should take strict action against the sub-agent agencies concerned. It's subject-wise
The report should be submitted to the government immediately.
Paddy stocks purchased by some of the sub-agent agencies last season to the millers.
Not made available as per the DO issued. As well as some organizations online.
According to the lot entry on the portal, no paddy stocks have been found. Hence, such institutions
Sub-accountants who purchase paddy as it is evident that there is a malpractice in the purchase
If the paddy stocks purchased from the institutions are not available as per the rules for replenishment, or
If it is clearly noticed that the institution has committed malpractices in the procurement of paddy, such Deputy Directors
# Page 12
I
District above institutions / institution drivers (Chairman Board of Directors, staff of the institution, etc.)
With the approval of the Coordination Committee, the Collector takes legal action, including filing of cases.
The government amount should be reimbursed through the RRC process through the office. as well as
It should immediately submit a case-wise report to the government.
The Central Government has decided to provide marginal, small and medium scale marketing to the farmers of the state from the marketing season 2019-20.
Large farmers such as those based on landholding as well as the. Jati, An. Tribes, Other and Unclassified
The state government has been requested to provide such classified information. This is because the information
from the farmers who have purchased paddy / millets at the time of procurement to make them available.
Sample 8 (a) of their land and self-declaration of caste of farmers (Self-Declaration)
the declaration), the copy of which is taken by the agent agencies for small, medium, and large as well as caste-wise.
Such farmers should be classified. Such a category is Annexure No. To rule in the pattern in IV
It should be submitted from time to time.
7.11क Central Government. Paddy / Millets as per instructions given in the letter dated 02.05.2019
Payment of purchase amounts as well as ancillary expenses through PFMS system.
is obligatory. In view of this, special campaigns have been launched by the agent agencies for all the concerned farmers.
Be sure to register.
7.12व Traders likely to resell last year's paddy / millets at repurchase centre
Under no circumstances will the old paddy / millets of the previous year be purchased taking into account
And only new (in marketing season 2024-25) paddy / millets produced by farmers.
Agent agencies should take special care that the purchase is made. Old or non-existent
Agencies are fully responsible for the procurement of paddy / millets from farmers.
will remain.
8) Storage of purchased millets (jowar, millet, maize and ragi): -
Millets, millet, maize, and ragi purchased as per the instructions of the agencies 8.1अभ
A representative of the state government, preferably on the same day, would do the entire weighing in a warehouse near the centre.
and take possession of the same as may be determined by the Collector after ensuring the quality and record of the same in the warehouse.
Take it regularly in writing. Storage centres, if required, and
Private warehouses of State Warehousing Corporations / Cooperative Societies shall be hired. The Centre
Government Provisional Cost for Kharif Marketing Season 2024-25
Sheet) Warehouse rent will be paid at the approved rate for warehouse rent.
In exceptional circumstances, if the cost exceeds these rates, a proposal to
through the Administrative Department with appropriate support from the Agent Agencies / District Supply Officer.
submitted to the government.
8.2 The District Collector / District Supply Officer while taking possession of millets shall hold the status of FAQ.
Be sure to verify this. Also, a certificate to this effect is issued by the Food Corporation of India.
to be sent.
# Page 13
I
8.3भरडध Warehouse-wise within one week of the expiry of the purchase period of the loan
Submit details of stored millets (jowar, bajra, maize, and ragi) to the government
should be done. Along with this, a certificate of FAQ status of the millets will be issued.
A copy should also be submitted.
The central government provides for the storage, distribution, and disposal of 8.4भरडध funds. 07.12.2021 and
d. The guidelines issued on 28.03.2022 shall be followed strictly.
The vigilance needs to be taken by the District Supply Officer.
After the 8.5भरडध grain is stored in the District Supply Officer's warehouses, the
Warehousing Rent Expenditure, Purchase Rent, Transportation Expenditure under National Food Security Act, 2013
Do it.
9) Storage and stockpiling of rice: -
9.1 In the case of funds, the storage shall be the responsibility of the respective agent agencies. Purchased
Paddy will remain in the hands of agent agencies. the relevant agent as required.
Organizations should rent out warehouses. Paddy storage, safety, transportation, stocking, related
All responsibilities for storing rice in the godown of the Collector / District Supply Officer
Agents are agencies and they are supposed to do the work. The District Collector of Paddy
It should not be seized. The Centre appoints the millers in the prescribed manner by the agent agencies.
The paddy is to be ploughed and prepared as per the government's terms and conditions.
The CMR / fortified rice is to be deposited in the Collector's Government Warehouse.
The input cost, storage size, transportation cost and other conditions to be decided by the Central Government in this regard.
And the conditions will apply. Separately, detailed instructions regarding paddy sowing were issued.
Will come.
9.2 Warehouse rent per month (for 2 months) for storage of coarse grains by Central Government
The rate has been approved. The responsibility of starting the paddy rush immediately under any circumstances
Agents will remain agencies. In any case, the paddy will remain in the godown for two months.
Be careful not to.
Central Government's immediate availability of paddy to the millers for 9.3भरड sowing and paddy ploughing.
CMR / Fortified Rice as per the terms and conditions of the Collector during the prescribed period.
Depositing in the warehouse will be the full responsibility of the agent agency. Anything in this regard
If there is a delay due to a cause, the agent responsible for the action for that delay
The agent agencies should take special care of the quality of the rice, noting that it will remain the institution's.
Color Coding for CMR Rice Received After Paddy Harvesting
On the implementation of the instructions given by the Central Government regarding the use of the scores made
be made in accordance with Appendix II.
10. Storage of stocks in open...
Millets and paddy purchased as per the instructions of the agent agencies should not be stored in the open.
If the need arises to store the stock in the open in very exceptional circumstances, before storing it.
Drainage is provided under and around such foodgrains with fully adequate palms.
# Page 14
I
Covering should be arranged. As well as timely pivot from a regular contractor as needed.
Protect the grain from insects. Stored in the open under any circumstances
The grain stock will not get wet from the rain and the grain bags will not get wet from the bottom or from the sides.
Even in the rainy season, such stocks remain open, but only with the care that the grain does not spoil.
The security of the grain outside the godown should be arranged from the very beginning. A letter to the government in this regard,
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection No: Narrow - 1298/15 Q. No.2579 / No.29,
in strict compliance with the Code prescribed under the Act dated 03rd August, 1998 (Annexure III).
After purchasing paddy / millets, it is sent to the State Government / Food Corporation of India team.
It should be designed in such a way that physical verification can be done.
11. Procurement period of Paddy Millets: -
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| The Season              | Crop                                                                                           | Purchase period             |
| Kharif Marketing Season | Paddy                                                                                          | 14.10.2024 to D. 31.01.2025 |
| Millets                 | 01.12.2024 to 31.03.2025                                                                       |
| Rabi Marketing Season   | Separate intimation will be made as per the instructions received from the Central Government. |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are central government directives regarding online payment of 11.1ल arrears (farmer's wages). This is the case
PFMS (Public Provident Fund) is the amount of paddy and coarse grains purchased by the agent agencies.
Payment should be made directly to the farmer's account through the Fund Monitoring System). The amount
Paddy / Millets credited to farmers' account in next 2 days from the date of purchase
There are directions from the central government to do so. Action should be taken accordingly.
11.2क In case of any technical problem, the agent agencies should contact the concerned offices.
Coordinate, take immediate action, and ensure that mistakes are paid.
11.3श Price of paddy and millets purchased from farmers by agency agencies of the government
Farmers should be provided immediately. Financial Adviser to Purchasing Agents in the event of a foreclosure
and Deputy Secretary, Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Department, Mumbai.
Weekly purchase statements from agencies and evidence of receipt of foodgrains at government godowns.
As soon as received, the full price of the purchased millets should be provided. This amount is free of charge.
To make it possible for the Office of the Financial Advisor and the Deputy Secretary to make payments.
Acceptance letters are immediately sent by the purchasing agent to the financial advisor and deputy every week.
be submitted to the Secretary's office.
11.4क Daily payment on Central Foodgrain Procurement Portal (CFPP) of the Central Government
There are directions from the Food Corporation of India. Accordingly, the Agencies shall procure Paddy / Millets.
Fill in the information in the D1 and D2 returns and submit it to the Food Corporation of India and the State Government as well as NeML.
They have to be presented. NeML should collate this information and update it to CFPP.
A copy of the same was also submitted to the Food Corporation of India and the State Government on a daily basis.
should do.
11.5अभ Weekly statement of paddy purchased by agencies under the base price scheme
Received with the signature of the District Supply Officer / Assistant District Supply Officer
Accordingly, the Financial Adviser and the Deputy Secretary general to both the agent agencies.
# Page 15
I
For quality paddy, it is Rs. 2300 / - per quintal for A grade paddy and Rs. 2320/-
The amount should be paid accordingly. Also, for sorghum (Maldandi), it is Rs. 3421 / -, Jowar
For (hybrid) Rs. 3371 / - per quintal for millets and Rs. 2625 / -, for maize
Rs. 2225 / - per quintal for Ragi and Rs. 4290 / - to be paid.
The Centre after depositing the amount of the ancillary expenditure in the rice godowns by way of rice rush.
The payment should be made after the order is issued with the approval of the government.
11.6अभ Agencies concerned for paddy / coarse grains to be procured under the scheme
Verify the farmers' online 7/12 extract and Sample 8 (a). The need for
Digitally signed 7/12 and Sample 8A, if desired, can be purchased. The Presentation
Keep documents and other original records in their office. Procurement of Paddy / Millets
Amounts will not be paid by overpayment or submitting incorrect payments in the context,
The agent agency will be solely responsible for this. Under this scheme, the agency
Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary for Paddy / Coarse Cereals to be Procured
Weekly Purchase Statement along with Forms' B 'and' C 'while submitting claims for reimbursement
Submit the certificate as follows: -
"It is certified that the amounts indicated in the claim have been paid in advance.
Didn't come. The accounts in the said claim are kept at the Purchasing Centres / concerned office.
The Department of Agriculture verifies the 7/12, 8A, PIKPERA along with the original record for the area.
Purchase of Paddy within the prescribed Average Income Limit by the Purchasing Centre.
As per the instructions of the government, PFMS has been transferred to the bank accounts of the farmers concerned.
11.7सदर Claims for Amounts Total liability for excess / inaccuracy in payment of amounts submitted
The agent shall remain the agency and the amounts collected accordingly shall be the immediate financial advisor and the deputy secretary.
Will be returned to the office or recovered from the following claim. "
11.8क Monthly stocks by the agent agencies as per the directions issued by the Central Government from time to time.
Required documents such as returns, gunny accounts, warehousing contracts, transport lease deeds, etc.
should be recorded.
11.9अभ Regarding procurement of Millets and Paddy by Agencies under Base Price Procurement Scheme
Detailed instructions on keeping separate accounts and submitting collateral information Financial Advisor
and be delivered immediately by the office of the Deputy Secretary.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
It is mandatory to keep as per the instructions and the audited statements in this regard,
12 at the end of the marketing season along with the utility certificates and necessary records in respect thereof.
Submission to the Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary within months will be mandatory.
There are 12 control rooms: -
12.1आध Paddy / Millets to be procured under MSP procurement scheme
(Jowar, Bajra, Maize and Ragi) Regular Report to Central Government / Food Corporation of India
The sending process should be done through the Office of the Financial Advisor and the Deputy Secretary.
At the district level and at the government level, there should be centralized control in the implementation of the 12.2सदर scheme.
A control room should be set up. the District Level Control Room
# Page 16
I
Management should be done by agent agencies. Technical manpower for telephone facility,
The expenditure on the scheme is met from the administrative expenses received by the Central Government.
Anything to be done. The additional cost will be borne by the state government.
No control room. The keys will be as follows:
A. Action on complaints received regarding paddy procurement.
B. Act as a helpline for difficulties in the paddy procurement process.
C. Uploading information on the online portal for paddy procurement.
12.3अभ Daily district-wise procurement report by agencies by 5: 30 pm
Send to the control room at the government level and to the office of the financial advisor and deputy secretary. Related to
Collectors and purchasing agent agencies conduct purchases after every Saturday evening.
Weekly Report of Paddy and Millets Procurement Arrived Financials in Annexure "I"
A copy of the same shall be forwarded to the Office of the Adviser and Deputy Secretary, Mumbai by the Deputy Secretary (Min.
The base price should be paid to the purchase plan).
The quality of rice purchased under the 13-kilometre base price scheme, from abroad.
Sale of paddy, purchase of paddy above average productivity, purchase at below guarantee price,
Procurement of Paddy by Traders / Brokers / Intermediaries, in any manner under the Scheme
Paddy / coarse cereals misappropriation / misappropriation / misappropriation and many more related to paddy procurement.
Complaints of malpractice are received. The agent agency in this regard, the Collector
Appropriate action was taken from time to time by the office, District Supply Officer on their behalf.
However, in some cases, it has been observed that the government is aware of this.
It can't be done. For, in such cases, the action to be taken at our level.
The report should be submitted to the government.
14 Expenditure on procurement of foodgrains and millets is a personal deposit of the Financial Advisor and the Deputy Secretary.
From the article Demand No. M-4, Main article 4408 - Food storage and warehousing
Capital Expenditure, 01 - Food, 101 - Procurement Supply, (02) Procurement Distribution and Price Control, (02) (12)
Procurement of Millets / Paddy under Mumbai City Minimum Support Price Scheme (Mandatory) (4408 0382)
21- Supplies and materials should be made from the grants available under this head.
15 The incidental cost of procurement of foodgrains and millets is as under: Demand No. M-4, Main article title
4408 - Capital expenditure on food storage and warehousing, 01 - Food, 101 - Procurement and supply,
(02) Procurement and Distribution and Price Control (02) (13) Mumbai City Minimum Support Price
Supplementary Expenditure (Mandatory) on Millets / Paddy under the Scheme (44080391) 50, Other Expenditure
The accounting should be done from the grants available under the head.
16 Procurement and Contingents received by the Central Government as per the approved rate in the Provisional Cost Sheet.
The amount of reimbursement for the expenses was paid by the Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary, Demand No. The M-4,
Headline 4408 Capital expenditure on food storage and warehousing, 01 - Food, 900,
Deposits and Recovery on Capital Accounts, (03) Procurement Distribution and Price Control, (03) (01) Mumbai City
Deposit and recovery of surplus / paddy under Minimum Support Scheme on capital account
(Mandatory) (44080406) 70, Subsidized Recovery to be submitted under the heading. Also, the district supply
# Page 17
I
The officials and the food distribution officer mentioned the amount from the CMR sale as above.
The balance (44080406) 70 should be credited through the Gras system.
17 Government Decision Informal Reference No.419 / Expenditure-10 of the Finance Department, D. Under 14.10.2024
is being issued with the consent received.
18 By making the decision available on the www.maharashtra.gov.in website of the Government of Maharashtra.
# Page 18
# Page 19
# Page 20
# Page 21
# Page 22
# Page 23
# Page 24
# Page 25
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37
# Page 38
# Page 39