# Page 1
Minimum in trading season 2025-26
Under the Basic Price Purchase Scheme
About Paddy / Millets Procurement...
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
Martyr Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032.
Date: 4th November 2025.
Read: -
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection, Government Decisions, No. Purchase-1115 / No.17 /
No.29, D. 14.01.2016.
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection, Government Corrigendum, No: 1014/28 Q. No.17 / Blue-
29, D. 03.11.2017.
3. MoU between the State Government and the Central Government on procurement of Paddy under the Decentralized Procurement Scheme.
Agreement. (MoU)
4. Central Government Letter No.F.No.3 (11) / 2025-Py I (389486) dated 19th September 2025
Central Government Letter No. F. No. 8-1-2022 - S & I (E-381310) dated 16th September 2025
6. Ma for purchase of Sun 2024-25. The meeting was chaired by the Minister (Anapu and Grasan).
History Purchase 1125 / Q. No.151 / Blue 29, dated 10.10.2024
The Proposal: -
The Minimum Support Price (MSP) procurement scheme is a central government scheme and provides a guarantee to farmers.
This scheme is implemented so that grains do not have to be sold at a discounted price (distress sale).
For this purpose, through agent agencies appointed by the State Government (in non-tribal areas, State of Maharashtra).
Cooperative Marketing Federation, Mumbai and Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribal Development in Tribal Areas
Corporation, Nashik) Procurement of Fair Average Quality (FAQ) Paddy and Millets in the State.
is done. Central Government Decentralized Procurement Scheme in the State for Paddy Procurement
Considering the recommendation made regarding the implementation of the Procurement Scheme (DCPS), the marketing season
The State Government has decided to implement the decentralized procurement scheme from 2016-17 throughout the State vide Reference No. 1
The decision has been taken by the government. Hence, the CMR (crude) generated in the scheme
rice) is being deposited in the godowns designated by the state government. According to Sun 2025-26
The issue of issuing instructions for the purchase of paddy and millets during this season was under the consideration of the government.
# Page 2
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
The Government's Decisions:
Paddy under the Minimum Support Price (MSP) procurement scheme by the Central Government in the marketing season 2025-26.
Minimum Support Prices for Millets and (Sorghum, Millet, Maize and Ragi) and Minor Millets
Minimum Support Price (MSP) has been announced. Accordingly, the farmers of the state should at least
To set up procurement centres in and around the state to avail the benefit of the base price.
The orders for procurement of millets (jowar, bajra, maize, ragi) are as follows:
They are: -
1) Decisions regarding the purchase: -
Food Corporation of India as the "Nodal Agency" of the Central Government throughout the State of Maharashtra.
(Food Corporation of India) will work.
1.2 Since the State Government is to act in coordination with the Food Corporation of India,
Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Mumbai and Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribal Federation
Development corporation limit. Nashik should act as the chief agent of the state government.
Process of physical procurement in non-tribal areas "Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing Federation,
Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribal Development Corporation Limited in Mumbai "and Tribal Areas." ,
Nashik "should be done through these agent agencies.
1.3 Uniforms for procurement of Paddy, Millets and Minor Millets
Specification) by the Central Government vide Reference No. 4. 16.09.2025 of the day
letters have been received. These bids will be applicable for the marketing season 2025-26.
(Appendices V to XII)
1.4खर Paddy (Paddy) produced by the agent agencies in their own godowns or as required.
It should be stocked and stocked in a rented warehouse. These Rental Warehouses
The nearest distance from the government godowns will be storage and transportation.
Agents should make sure they are qualified to do so. the Central Government
By crushing the paddy as per the prescribed instructions (as per the instructions and other terms and conditions).
Fortified Rice / CMR Government as per the directions of the Government / District Collectors
Deposit in the warehouses (of the District Supply Officer).
1.5 Procurement of coarse cereals like jowar, bajra, maize and ragi by way of storage in warehouses
The main agent agencies will be responsible for all proceedings before the tax.
Barley, millet, maize, and ragi are grown in state government warehouses.
should be stored. Before storing these millets in the godowns of the state government.
The quality check should be done by the Collector / District Supply Officer.
1.7 The grains of jowar, bajra, maize and ragi are procured once and stored in the government godown.
Storage of such grains after quality check and weighting of millets.
Page 2 of 41
# Page 3
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
Responsibility for maintenance, intra-district transportation / diversification, etc.
The concerned Collector / District Supply Officer will be there.
1.8 Paddy procured at Dhan Shopping Centre, storage of that paddy, procurement of paddy
Centre to mill to mill transport, government in the mill
Rice coagulation, post-coagulation CMR and finished CMR (rice)
The entire responsibility of depositing in the government godowns will remain with the agent agencies.
2) Appointment of Agent: -
In accordance with the above decision, the following agent agencies shall be appointed in the State: -
2.1 In the Bigger Tribal Areas - In the Marketing Season 2025-26, under the Minimum Support Price Scheme
Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Mumbai for procurement of Paddy, Millets
(Mocking Federation) as the chief agent under this order.
is being done. The agent agency prescribes procurement operations in the area.
Be sure to do this in a timely manner.
In the 2.2आद Residential Area - Minimum Support Price Purchase in Marketing Season 2025-26
Maharashtra State Co-operative Tribal to procure Paddy, Millets under the Scheme
Development Corporation, Nashik (Adivasi Development Corporation) is the agent agency of
is being appointed as the chief agent under the order. the agency of the said agent or
Care should be taken to ensure that the procurement process in the area is carried out within the stipulated time frame.
3) Base price, general quality and standard: -
3.1आध Unique Price
Table A
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Crop             | Base price (Rs.)   | Amount to be provided to farmers (Rs.) |
| Paddy / Rice     | Normal (एफ.ए.क Q.) | 2369                                   | 2369 |
| "A" grade        | 2389               | 2389                                   |
| Millets          | Sorghum (hybrid)   | 3699                                   | 3699 |
| Jowar (Maldandi) | 3749               | 3749                                   |
| millet           | 2775               | 2775                                   |
| Maca             | 2400               | 2400                                   |
| angry            | 4886               | 4886                                   |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For foodgrains procured under the Minimum Support Price Procurement Scheme
The farmers will be paid the rates as mentioned above. The central government has
These rates will be paid based on the procedure followed.
Page 3 of 41
# Page 4
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
3.2सर Excellent quality and quality
3.2.1क Those who fit the input prescribed by the Central Government in the Air Base Price Procurement Scheme
Paddy / coarse grains need to be procured. Crop wise as determined by the Central Government
The proposal is attached to the Annexure to the Government Decision.
These trained graders are examined by the 3.2.2अभ agencies only on the instructions of the Central Government.
Purchase fittings of paddy / millets. Paddy rejected after inspection /
Fodder report every 15 days by District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager
It should be submitted to the government.
In case of purchase of 3.2.3कम grade paddy / millets and resulting in any fiscal deficit, or
Agent agencies will be solely responsible for any other problems that arise.
3.2.4ध Quality check of foodgrains by the Government (District Supply Officer)
Quality control in the office will be done by trained staff).
If any quality defects are found in the 3.2.5खर or during storage inspection.
The agent agency will have full responsibility. It also includes case-specific corrections.
The action is to be taken by the agent agency itself and the damage caused by such action.
The agent agencies will be solely responsible.
4) Humidity: -
Humidity in excess of the prescribed by the Central Government for the marketing season 2025-26
Paddy / coarse grains should not be purchased if found. Too wet in any case
Or don't buy moldy rice / millets. Millets are clean and dry and are marketable.
Agent agencies should verify that it is (mocatable). Humidity higher than normal
In case of purchase of paddy / millets, appropriate action will be taken by the agencies concerned in a timely manner.
The report should be submitted to the government.
5) General Terms and Conditions: -
5.1. Extensive publicity to the scheme: -
The agent agencies should give wide publicity to farmers about the 5.1.1य jojoba.
5.1.2खर Only purchase of minimum support price at the centre without setting a bar on the purchase price
Information about the quality, offers, shopping centres, etc. under the scheme should also be displayed.
The instructions have been translated into Marathi and Hindi for the farmers to understand for sure.
It should be done.
5.1.3एफ .AQ quality standards, shopping period, etc. Highlighting each shopping center on the board
should be displayed on the facade.
These boards showing 5.1.4दर, status, shopping centres, all Agricultural Produce Market Committees, Gram Panchayats,
Must be installed on the facade of the tehsil office, panchayat samiti office, etc.
Instructions should be given by the District Collector to all concerned.
Page 4 of 41
# Page 5
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
In any case, non-FAQ grade grains will not be procured.
FAQ of paddy / millets local for essentials like input, base price, etc.
Extensive publicity by agent agencies and district collectors through newspapers and other media.
The action comes from the administrative expenses paid to the subagent agencies.
The District Collector concerned should ensure this.
5.1.6खर Adequate publicity regarding these centres and the names of the villages attached to each shopping centre.
Collectors and purchasing agent agencies should be careful about giving.
5.1.7र Brought to the shopping center after the shopping center closes in the evening, but not purchased
It is widely reported that the responsibility of maintaining the paddy / millets will remain with the concerned farmers.
Give it.
2.2 Shopping centres: -
5.2.1 Committee on Selection of Shopping Centres and Shopping Establishments headed by the Collector as under:
Being assembled: -
Table-B
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A. No. | Members of the Committee                                                                      | the post of          |
| 1      | the Collector                                                                                 | The President's      |
| 2      | the District Superintendent Agriculture Officer                                               | The member's         |
| 3      | District Sub-Divisional Cooperative Societies                                                 | The member's         |
| 4      | the District Supply Officer                                                                   | The member's         |
| 5      | District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager (depending on the respective geographical area) | the Member-Secretary |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.2.2म One of the shopping centers that will be open in the next shopping season with no complaints in the previous shopping seasons
Shopping centres will continue to operate during the marketing season 2025-26. Complaints about such shopping centers
Agent agencies should make sure they don't.
5.2.3म Complaints were received about the Shopping Centers in the Shopping Center, which is going on in the next marketing season.
Permission / cancellation of Shopping Centres by Agents / Agencies after enquiry.
Proposals should be submitted to the Paddy Procurement Committee with self-explanatory comments. In the case of
After a thorough inquiry, the committee decided to allow such institutions to set up shopping centres.
A separate list of such institutions should be made. These institutions have been
The government should be informed about the decision. The agent is responsible for notifying the government
There will be institutions.
5.2.4प Agents with their self-explanatory feedback for opening a new shopping centre
Proposals should be submitted to the above committee. After a thorough investigation by the committee in the case, such institutions
A decision should be taken to approve the opening of shopping centres. A separate list of such institutions
5 out of 41 pages
# Page 6
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
should be made. The government should be informed about the decisions taken regarding these institutions.
The agent agencies will be responsible for informing the government.
5.2.5सम Total received for procurement under Base Price Scheme in the district
List of procurement agencies, list of agencies approved by the committee, rejected by the committee
The list of institutions should be reported to the government. Submit a list of approved institutions
Shopping centers that were operational during the previous marketing season, and newly approved shopping centers
A list should be submitted with such explicit references. The agent is responsible for notifying the government
There will be institutions.
5.2.6म Increase in Shopping Centres as per requirement taking into account the purchases made in the previous season
The committee should also decide on what to do.
5.3 Paddy procurement centres to be contracted with selected paddy procurement centres
Storage capacity and the objective given to them should be clearly included.
5.4 Food Corporation of India, Headquarters. For the shopping center under the 14.03.2022 letter
The required checklist has already been issued. According to the marketing season
Ongoing in the current season before actual paddy / millets procurement in 2025-26 begins
Check if the Paddy / Millets procurement centres meet the Central Government norms or not
should be done.
Complete information about these centers is available on PCSAP (Procurement Center Self-Assessment Portal).
There are instructions from the central government regarding filling up. Accordingly, in accordance with the instructions in Annex XIV, all
The agent agencies will be responsible for uploading the information of the shopping centres on this portal.
The technical support required for this should be provided by BeAM. This information is sub-
The payment should be made in coordination with the agent agency as well as the Food Corporation of India.
5.6उप The main agent agencies, while entering into contracts with the agent agencies / procurement centres, shall
Terms and conditions should also be determined from the level.
Requirements for 5.3खर: -
5.3.1अभ Agencies should expeditiously implement the paddy / millets procurement plan. For the sake of
Shopping centers should be opened at the required places, trained personnel should be appointed.
Drying, cleaning, non-perishable and procurement of foodgrains at the centre 5.3.2खर
The basic facilities required for smooth functioning of the process (sieve, fans, tarpaulin, polythene)
Necessary tools like sheets, etc., necessary weights, humidity gauges (Moisture meters)
gunny bags, twine, etc.) at the shopping centre.
Agents are agencies.
The agent agencies for the 5.3.3य are located in the area covered by the Agricultural Produce Market Committee.
Drying, cleaning and non-perishable procurement of foodgrains at procurement centres.
The basic facilities required for smooth functioning of the process (sieve, fans, tarpaulin, polythene)
6 out of 41 pages
# Page 7
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
Necessary tools like sheets, etc., necessary weights, humidity gauges (Moisture meters)
Barley, cotton, etc.) should be made available through the Agricultural Produce Market Committee.
5.3.4क Shopping centres operating in areas under the Agricultural Produce Market Committee
Details as well as procurement of materials supplied by the Agricultural Produce Market Committee to these procurement centres.
Centre-wise details should be submitted to the government once the procurement centre is operational. It is entirely
The responsibility will lie with the agent agencies.
5.3.5खर Necessary to control the quality of paddy / coarse grains to be grown
The agent is fully responsible for hiring the equipment (image analysis kit) and adequately trained graders.
There are institutions. This should be ensured by the District Collector concerned.
5.3.6खर of paddy / millets not in FAQ status) i.e. paddy, jowar,
Millet, maize and ragi (full responsibility for purchase and loss).
The responsibility will rest entirely with the agent agencies. Purchase of low-quality paddy / millets.
Such employees / graders should be penalized by the agency if tried.
5.3.7आध Paddy / Millets procurement as MSP procurement scheme is for the benefit of farmers
In the course of this Government decision as well as the instructions given by the Central and State Government from time to time /
Follow the procedure.
The 5.4खर method is: -
5.4.1प Each village should be connected to a specific shopping centre. Shopping centers and each shopping center
District Collectors and Procurement Officers to give adequate publicity to the names of the villages that have been added.
Agent agencies should be on the lookout.
5.4.2खर By obtaining a list of farmers from the taluks, area-wise and village-wise, linked to the centres.
Take it and record it in the register at the shopping center. More than one village buying the same
If connected to a centre, a separate register should be maintained at such a centre. It's
The responsibility will lie with the agent agencies. At the time of checking / requisitioning this Register Purchase Centre
The agent agencies will be responsible for making it available to the government in due course.
5.4.3त A farmer in any village within the limits of a taluka according to his choice.
Paddy can be sold at the shopping center. Accordingly, registration for sale of paddy at the Paddy Procurement Centre will be done.
The farmers who have been affected should be registered in the register at the procurement centre. The register
The district supply officers should make the procurement centre available at the time of inspection.
5.4.4ऑनल Register of farmers
5.4.4.1श Introduction of online mode of procurement while procuring paddy / coarse grains from farmers
It has come. BeAM's for this online shopping marketing season 2025-26
The records are maintained as per the directions of the Central Government using the platform PFMS (Public Funds).
Monitoring System), CFPP, CFSP and all others as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Linking to websites is mandatory. All notified by the Central Government
The respective service providers will be responsible for linking to the websites.
7 out of 41 pages
# Page 8
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
5.4.4.2क All process of procurement under the Standard Base Price Procurement Scheme
Being online, all the farmers who are willing to take advantage of the scheme can do so online.
Registration is required. All the farmers have to pay the BEAM within the time limit given by the government.
Registration is required on the platform.
5.4.4.3क As per the new Minimum Threshold Parameters set by the Central Government
Aadhaar authentication is the online registration of farmers under the scheme.
Authentication method) should be used only. The support required for this
By making Aadhaar Authentication Devices available to all shopping centres.
The main agent agencies will be responsible for the payment.
5.4.4.4ऑनल In-line registration includes Aadhaar number, savings bank account number, 7/12 quotes, Pikpera, etc.
Also, all other necessary things should be recorded. Applicable from the Department of Agriculture at the time
Farmer ID on AgriSTACK website
The above registration is mandatory.
Under the 5.4.4.5वन Rights Act, 2005, leases are held in respect of land in forests.
To register farmers under the scheme and purchase food grains from them, the following are done:
Action should be taken. Record of area under paddy / millets crop on this holding area, as well as
The 7/12 reference record, the required documents regarding the lien, at 7/12
Record of paddy / millets sown, etc., certified by the Collector.
Online registration of such farmers should be done within the stipulated time. The agent is responsible for
There will be institutions. Tenancy on forest lands available with the Collector
The list of farmers who received paddy on the leased land
The list of farmers who have been planted is supplied by the district with the approval of the Collector.
The officer should make available to both the agencies concerned, and the BeAM.
The BeAM has also launched an online portal for such farmers to purchase paddy online.
facilities should be made available. Also, while making physical purchases from these farmers at the procurement centres.
It is mandatory to authenticate the Aadhaar of the farmers and take a live photo. Purchase according to
Agent agencies need to ensure that action is taken against the centres.
By registering farmers who produce on the lands of 5.4.4.6द Locations / Agricultural Corporations
To purchase from them, paddy / coarse grains on such lands from the farmers
Agreements with Devasthanas / Agriculture Corporations of farmers who produce
(Lease Agreement), 7/12 Record of paddy / millets sown
The farmers should be certified by the Tehsildar and only after that.
Online registration should be done in a time-bound manner.
8 out of 41 pages
# Page 9
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
5.4.4.7तस This is the farmers' support while purchasing paddy at the paddy procurement centers.
It is mandatory to authenticate and take a live photo. Accordingly, action will be taken at the shopping centres.
Agent agencies need to take care of what happens.
If more than one farmer's name is recorded on the 5.4.4.8ग Sample 7/12 document, such
The total area over 7/12 will be recorded when registering farmers separately.
Agent agencies are supposed to make sure they don't. If such records are found
The agent agencies will have the overall responsibility.
5.4.4.9सर Documents / Documents to be carefully verified and registered by the farmer.
The agent agency will be solely responsible. On the basis of false / forged documents
In case of fake farmer registration, the deputy agent is fully responsible.
The agency and agent shall be the officers / office bearers of the agency. at such an institution / purchase.
Any other reasonable requirement, including detention, for the permanent purchase of paddy from the Government at the Centre.
Action will be taken.
The 5.4.4.10प experience has shown that agent agencies have a say in procurement / registration.
Upon receipt of the complaint, the agent agencies inquire at their level and as required.
take action. However, such matters are not communicated to the government. Because of this
the Government in respect of matters arising out of or in connection with judicial matters / legislative business
Problems are faced. Agent in respect of purchase / registration in consideration of the claimant
Enquiries at their level by agent agencies after complaints are received with the agencies, as well as
It will be mandatory to report the matter to the government.
Procurement of foodgrains directly from registered farmers 5.4.5ऑनल
5.4.5.1खर Procurement to farmers to avoid crowding at these centres, maintain law and order
Advance notice must be given before arriving at the centers. Under this scheme, the farmers will be provided with
Pre-notification through SMS on mobile should be provided from the BeAM portal.
5.4.5.2ध PCSAP with respect to farmers / grains coming to the procurement centre for sale
All instructions on the website should be implemented. At the shopping center
Necessary in accordance with the safety of the paddy / coarse grains brought for sale by the farmers.
Action should be taken.
5.4.5.3खर In accordance with / as required by the paddy stock sold by the farmers at the centre
Online entries should be made on the BeAM portal.
Aadhaar authentication of farmers while making physical purchases from farmers at procurement centres.
And taking a live photo is mandatory as per the instructions of the central government.
5.4.5.5श Taxpayers should create a self-register in respect of paddy / coarse grains sold.
These include 1) Name of the farmer 2) Sow / Group Number and Area, 3) Paddy sold at the centre
/ Include information on sorghum, millet, maize, and ragi. So, again, the grain
9 out of 41 pages
# Page 10
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
The farmer who brought the earlier 7/12 extract from this registry was taken out as soon as it was brought.
It can be ensured that the grain is of its own production.
5.4.5.6क The Central Government has decided to provide marginal, small and medium scale marketing to the farmers of the state from the marketing season 2019-20.
Large farmers such as those based on landholding as well as the. Jati, An. tribes, and others.
A request has been made to the state government to provide information by classifying it as unclassified. This is because
Paddy / coarse grains purchased at the time of purchase to provide information
Sample 8 (a) of the farmers' land and self-assessment of the farmers' caste
With a self-declaration, a copy of which is taken by the agent agencies, small, medium, and
Large and caste-wise farmers should be classified. Such a category is Annexure No. IV.
The form in question should be submitted to the government from time to time.
The 5.4.5.7क location is also very large, regardless of the area under grain and average productivity.
It has been observed that grain is purchased in bulk (indirectly by traders).
Hence, the farmers' 7/12 area under cultivation, this year's crop situation
(Paisa) In purchasing paddy / millets, taking into account the average yield of the crop.
Come.
5.4.5.8स District-wise limit of per hectare productivity by respective District Collectors District Superintendents
Receive from the agricultural authorities and make available to the agent agencies and the BeAM.
The agent is responsible for ensuring that purchases do not exceed this limit under any circumstances.
There will be institutions. If such a purchase is noticed, the government will be informed immediately.
should be done.
5.4.5.9खर If the paddy is being purchased by traders / brokers / middlemen at the centres
the purchase of paddy / coarse grains under the scheme, if noticed, or in any manner
Such Shopping Centres if cases of fraud / misappropriation / misappropriation are noticed.
And the concerned sub-agent agencies, the agent agencies should take strict action. It's his
A case-by-case report should be submitted to the government immediately.
5.4.5.10व Traders likely to resell last year's paddy / millets at repurchase centre
Under any circumstances, the old paddy / millets of the previous year will be purchased taking into account
No and only fresh produce from farmers (in marketing season 2025-26)
The agent agencies will be solely responsible for the procurement of paddy / millets. the old
Or if the paddy / millets are purchased from non-farmers, the agent is fully responsible for it.
will remain in the institutions.
Paddy / Millets brought by 5.4.5.11रकन or similar vehicle before acceptance.
Make sure that it is completely owned by the farmer concerned.
5.4.5.12गत Distribution of paddy stocks purchased by some agent agencies to millers during the season
Not made available as per the DO received. As well as some organizations online.
Page 10 of 41
# Page 11
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
According to the lot entry on the portal, no paddy stocks have been found. Hence, such institutions
Sub-accountants who purchase paddy as it is evident that there is a malpractice in the purchase
If the paddy stocks purchased from the institutions are not available as per the rules for replenishment, or
If it is clearly noticed that the institution has committed malpractices in the procurement of paddy, such Deputy Directors
District above institutions / institution drivers (Chairman Board of Directors, staff of the institution, etc.)
By taking legal action, including filing of offences, with the approval of the Coordination Committee.
By reimbursing the government amount through the RRC process through the Collector's office.
should be taken. It should also submit a case-by-case report to the government immediately. Report
The agent agencies will be responsible for submission.
5.4.5.13क Central Government. Paddy / Millets as per instructions given in the letter dated 02.05.2019
Payment of purchase amounts as well as ancillary expenses through PFMS system.
is obligatory. Under the scheme for farmers, special campaigns have been launched by the agency in this direction.
Care should be taken to register all concerned farmers.
CCTV installed at procurement centres / paddy storage godowns in 5.4.5.14ध
Its recording should be preserved. This recording will be made available if requested by the government.
should be given. The agent agency will be solely responsible for this.
5.5तप Settings -:
5.5.1भ Officials of the Food Corporation of India / State Government visit the procurement centres regularly.
Check whether the purchase is being made in the prescribed manner and the advice given by them.
With this in mind, the purchasing agent agencies should take appropriate corrective action / measures accordingly.
It will be necessary. Also submit the completion report to the officer as well as the government.
Agencies will be obligated to do so.
Paddy / coarse cereals supplied under 5.5.2खर are not as per the Uniform Specifications, unless
The State Government team will have the power to refuse paddy / millets. as well as as as required
The state government can also take the help of a third party for quality check.
5.5.3ज The District Magistrate has constituted a Quality Control and Monitoring Team during the paddy / coarse grains procurement period.
should be set up. Non-FAQ grade paddy / millets through special drive by this team
Disciplinary action should be taken against the officers and employees responsible for the purchase.
The report should be submitted to the government.
5.5.4प As per previous experience, it has been noticed that paddy from outside the state is sold at the state procurement centres.
are brought for sale. Thus, in any case, the paddy of a foreign state
The District Collector should form a team so that they do not come for sale in the state. This kind of
If the incident is noticed, the concerned team will take appropriate action and report it to the government.
be submitted. Permanent detention at such shopping centres along with other appropriate action as required.
will be done.
11 out of 41 pages
# Page 12
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
5.5.5दक Inspection report by SIT / District level officers every week
Submission to the government will be mandatory.
5.6 Borrowings:
5.6.1द All agent agencies are required to pay for the entire season through the Government (Executive Blue-
16B, Anapu and Grahasamagriha, Mantralaya, Mumbai) as directed by the Central Government.
will be made available at the District / Taluka level Warehouses / Shopping Centres in a time bound manner.
Agent agencies should take care that it is delivered.
5.6.2म New gunpowder station received from the Jute Commissioner after the end of the previous marketing season
The government 18.05.2017 and d. As indicated in the letter from 13.12.2018, the ongoing kharif marketing
Accounting for the left over gunpowder for the season 2025-26
d. Paragraphs with 13.12.2018 Circular. Both the agents in the return in 1 (Annexure XIII)
Organizations should submit to the government (Karyasana Blue-16B, Anapu & Gramsavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai).
5.6.3क Requirements due to shortage of new / old jute gunny bags as per Central Government instructions
Agents, if found, take government approval for millers' / farmers' gunny bags.
Use and accounting by both agent agencies to the government (Executive Branch No. 16B, ANAPU, and
Submission of Grasnavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai).
5.6.4म Withdrawal from the millers of the gunpowder that is being deposited with the millers or of the gunpowder.
Informing the government separately by formulating a policy regarding the collection of the amount from the government level.
It will come.
5.6.5 The amount of gunpowder that the agent agency previously recovered from the payment to the millers
If so, the amount should be deposited with the financial advisor and the deputy secretary's office. As well as such
Cardamom Account / Details submitted to Karyasana Blue-16B, Anapu & Grasshopper, Mantralaya, Mumbai
Do it.
For 5.6.6भरड rice, the grain counts must be standardized when giving the grain to millers. such as this
Paddy should be given to millers by test weighting of standard 10% bales. Scores during inspection
Disciplinary action against concerned officers / staff if found not certified
should be done. This is controlled by the Managing Directors of both the agent agencies.
Do it.
5.6.7अभ Capital in English on a basket of "A" grade rice arrived at the shopping center by the agencies
The letter "A," and the letter "C" on a basket of common grade rice.
Do it.
The gunpowder that was once used to buy the 5.6.8ध is used again to buy the paddy.
It should not be moldy, cracked, broken, or scratched. It also has a capacity of 50 kg.
The weight of the gunny bag should not be less than 500 grams. If found at the time of any such inspection
Page 12 of 41
# Page 13
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
The agent agency should take immediate action against the officer / employee responsible.
This should also be controlled by the managing directors of both agent agencies.
The use of gunny bags for procurement of 5.6.9ध n / CMR and millets is regulated by the Central Government. 13.12.2018
Follow the instructions in the letter. In addition, the Central Government may from time to time issue circulars regarding the
As per the instructions received, Karyasana Blue-16B, both by Anapu and Grasnavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
Agents should give the agencies the necessary instructions.
The new and old gunny bags received at the 5.6.10खर centre as well as the usage records of BeAM.
Purchases on the portal will be mandatory for shopping centres. The two agent agencies had their
Control at the level and submit a monthly report to the government as required.
Both agent agencies will be responsible for doing so.
5.6.11ज Paddy / coarse cereal bags, as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time.
The District Supply Officer shall check whether the quantities are in accordance with the prescribed standards.
Agents must be accompanied by representatives of the organization. Save this information at the shopping center.
Not meeting the Central Government standards on gunpowder in this inspection.
If the blister appears, it should be discarded. Also the gunpowder centre provided by the tenderer.
If it is found that the government does not meet the standards regarding gunpowder
To the notice of the tenderer / Government (Executive Branch - 16B, Anapu & Grasnavi, Mantralaya, Mumbai)
They should be brought and replaced by the concerned. Low-quality gunpowder will not be used.
This should be taken care of by the agent agencies. If such a complaint is received by the Government, it shall be
A committee should be set up at the government level to examine the basis, if required.
and the report of the action taken by the agent agencies on the basis of that inspection report.
Submission to the government will be binding on the agent agencies.
Storage of procured food grains (jowar, millet, maize and ragi): -
5.6.12.1भरडध Storage of jowar, millet, maize and ragi
Millets, millet, maize, and ragi purchased as per the instructions of the agencies 5.6.12.2अभ
A representative of the state government, preferably on the same day, would do the entire weighing in a warehouse near the centre.
and ensure the quality and capture as decided by the Collector and record it.
It should be taken regularly in the warehouse.
5.6.12.3ज It is of FQA status when millets are seized by the District Magistrate / District Supply Officer.
Be sure to verify this. Also, the certification of Indian food.
be sent to the corporation.
Central and State Warehousing Corporations / Cooperative Societies for storage, if required.
Private warehouses should be rented out.
Kharif Marketing Season 2025-26 by the Central Government for warehousing rental undertaken by 5.6.12.5भ
Warehouse rent at the rate approved by the Provisional Cost Sheet for
will be paid. If the cost exceeds these rates in exceptional circumstances,
13 out of 41 pages
# Page 14
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
Proposal in this regard has been made by the Agent Agencies / District Supply Officer with appropriate support.
be submitted to the government through the administrative department.
5.6.12.6भरडध Warehouse-wise within one week of the expiry of the purchase period of the loan
Submit details of stored millets (jowar, bajra, maize, and ragi) to the government
should be done. Along with this, a certificate of FAQ status of the millets will be issued.
A copy should also be submitted.
The central government provides for the storage, distribution, and disposal of 5.6.12.7भरडध funds. 07.12.2021 and
d. The guidelines issued on 28.03.2022 shall be followed strictly.
The vigilance needs to be taken by the District Supply Officer.
After the 5.6.12.8भरडध grain is stored in the District Supply Officer's warehouses, the
Warehousing Rent Expenditure, Purchase Rent, Transportation Expenditure under National Food Security Act, 2013
Do it.
5.6.13 Paddy storage and storage:
In the case of 5.6.13.1ध, the overall responsibility for storage will lie with the respective agent agencies. Purchase
The paddy done will remain in the hands of the agent agencies. related to it as needed.
The agent agencies should hire warehouses. the concerned Collector / District Supply Officer
Storage, safety, transportation of rice before it is directly deposited in their godowns.
The agent agencies have all the responsibility for the leakage and the work is done by the agent agencies.
have to be done. Agents Agencies Sub-agent Agencies to stockpile paddy
List the warehouses. In addition to these godowns, other godowns have grain reciprocals.
Do not transport / store. If such things are found, the responsibility lies entirely with him.
Agents will remain agencies.
Procurement of all paddy except for the millets supplied in the 5.6.13.2खर
It has to be in the hands of the Centre. The agent agencies will be entirely responsible for this.
If any irregularity is found in the case, appropriate action as required by the Government.
Action will be taken.
The 5.6.13.3ध is not to be taken over by the District Collector. of the millers in the manner prescribed by the agent agencies.
The paddy is to be ploughed as per the terms and conditions of the Central Government by appointment and
Finished CMR Fortified Rice deposited in Government Warehouse of District Collector
It has to be done. The investment size, storage size, etc. to be decided by the Central Government in this regard.
Transportation costs and other terms and conditions will apply. Detailed instructions on paddy stubble burning
will be issued separately.
5.6.13.4क Monthly as per provisional tariff for storage of paddy procured by the Central Government
The warehouse (for 2 months only) approves the rental rate. So the paddy purchased was for two months.
The agent agencies will be solely responsible for paying the fee before it is completed. For the sake of
Page 14 of 41
# Page 15
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
The agent agencies are required to take note of the paddy stock at the procurement centre and pay the price.
It is mandatory to plan for 15 days.
Immediate supply of paddy to the millers for 5.6.13.5भरड sowing and the centre for paddy ploughing.
CMR Fortified Rice as per Govt. terms & conditions / during prescribed period
The entire responsibility of depositing in the collector's warehouse rests with the agent agency.
If there is a delay for any reason, it will be for a delay.
It should be noted that the agent agency will be responsible for the action.
The 5.6.13.6अभ agencies should take special care of the quality of the rice. Paddy to be received in abundance
Centre on use of colour coded multiples for CMR rice
The implementation of the instructions given by the Government shall be done in accordance with Annexure II.
5.7 Regarding storage of food grains / millets stocks-
Millets and paddy purchased as per the instructions of the agent agencies should not be stored in the open.
If the need arises to store the stock in the open in very exceptional circumstances, it is
Before storing, drainage is provided under and around such food grains and completely removed from them.
Arrangements should be made to cover with adequate palm leaves. Also by a regular contractor as needed.
Protect the grain from pests by timely pruning. in the open under any circumstances.
The stored grain stock will not get wet from the rain and the grains will not fall under the bundles or
There will be no moisture on the side, and even in the rainy season, such stocks remain open, but the grain is poor.
The safety of the grain outside the warehouse should be ensured from the very beginning, taking care that it does not happen.
should be arranged. Government Letter to this effect, Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection No:
Narrow - 1298/15 Q. No.2579 / No.29, dated 03rd August, 1998 (Annexure III) as prescribed
The code made should be followed strictly. The state after the purchase of paddy / millets
Physical verification can be done by the Government / Food Corporation of India team.
It should be structured in a way.
5.8इतर -:
The 5.8.1उप agents should be appointed by the main agent agencies on their own responsibility.
The district collector should not issue authorization letters to the deputy agents. with the appointment of the Deputy
It should be noted that there will be no direct government involvement.
The Maharashtra Procurement of Agricultural Income (Regulation) Rules, 1963
Under Rule 32 (d) of the Central Government Minimum in the area of Agricultural Produce Market Committee.
Purchased at a lower price than the guaranteed price announced under the base price scheme.
The market committee needs to be careful not to go. According to the "Market Committee
If such acts are not curbed, they shall be proceeded against under Rule 45 of the aforesaid Rules.
The government can take appropriate action. "The matter is being taken up by the respective District Collectors in their respective areas.
Agricultural income should be brought to the notice of market committees. Under the Minimum Support Price Scheme
Plaques showing declared grain quality, prescribed inputs and prices in bold
Page 15 of 41
# Page 16
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
The District Collector should give strict instructions to the Agricultural Produce Market Committees for planting in the area and
It should be strictly implemented by the market committees.
Make sure that the transaction is not below the guaranteed price.
5.8.3प As per prior experience in the area of Agricultural Produce Market Committee at a price lower than the base price
The Central Government asks the State Government for reasons in respect of the purchase made and
Most such purchases are non-FAQ in nature when the disclosure is sought.
Paddy / coarse grains appear to have been sown. However, such low-priced purchases
The Agricultural Produce Market Committees inform the concerned about the purchase and sale rates regarding the transactions.
Without specifying the FAQ / non-FAQ status at the time of submission / submission of the report.
In most cases, correspondence from the central government to the state is done because of the supply.
Hence, the prices of paddy as well as millets purchased by any market committees in their area.
In addition to the purchase and sale price when publishing or communicating through any medium.
It is also advisable to mention FAQ and non-FAQ standards.
The district collector should give the agricultural produce in his area to the market committees.
Maharashtra to procure Paddy, Jowar, Millets, Maize and Ragi under the Basic Price Scheme
State Cooperative Marketing Federation, Mumbai and Tribal Development Corporation, Nashik.
Contingent Expenditure Temporary approved by the Central Government for Kharif Marketing Season 2025-26
Provisional cost sheet will be paid.
Deficit / reduction in Millets and Paddy procured under the scheme in 5.8.5वर was acknowledged by the Central Government.
So, accordingly case wise it will be permissible.
6) Paddy Millets Procurement Period:
Table A
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| The Season              | Crop                                                                                           | Purchase period            |
| Kharif Marketing Season | Paddy                                                                                          | 3.11.2025 to D. 31.03.2026 |
| Millets                 | 3.11.2025 to 28.02.2026                                                                        |
| Rabi Marketing Season   | Separate intimation will be made as per the instructions received from the Central Government. |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The agent agencies should procure paddy from the farmers in the prescribed manner during the above mentioned period.
7) Wrongs
7.1अभ Price of paddy and coarse grains procured by agencies from farmers to farmers
should be provided immediately. Paddy / coarse grains purchased in this amount as directed by the Central Government.
Deposits should be made to the farmers' account within the next 2 days from the day.
Procurement of Paddy / Millets by Agencies (District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager)
It is mandatory to do the purchase verification on the day itself.
Page 16 of 41
# Page 17
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
7.3अभ Paddy and coarse grains purchased by agencies under the base price scheme
Weekly Returns to District Supply Officer / Assistant District Supply Officer
On receipt of signature, Rs. 2369 / - and A Grade
For rice, it is Rs. 2389 / - to be paid. Also copies for jowar (Maldandi)
Rs. 3749 / - per quintal for sorghum (hybrid) and Rs. 3699 / - per quintal for millets
2775 / - per quintal for maize and Rs. 2400 / - per quintal for Ragi and Rs. 4886 / - as follows:
The amount must be paid.
7.4अभ Weekly statement of paddy purchased by agencies under the base price scheme
Financial with signature of District Supply Officer / Assistant District Supply Officer
It is mandatory for the advisor and deputy secretary to submit every week.
In the case of 7.5भरडध paddy, the agent agencies submit weekly returns and grains to the government godowns.
Proof of receipt, acceptance letters of receipt, and purchase of foodgrains as per the regular procedure.
Submit to the Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary weekly.
7.6 There are directions from the Central Government regarding the online payment of benefits (Farmer's Furniture). This is the case
PFMS (Public Provident Fund) is the amount of paddy and coarse grains purchased by the agent agencies.
Payment should be made directly to the farmer's account through the Fund Monitoring System).
7. In case of any technical problem, the Agencies shall communicate the same to the respective offices.
Coordinate, take immediate action, and ensure that mistakes are paid.
7.8अन The Centre after depositing the amount of the sexual expenditure in the rice godowns in the form of rice jaggery
The payment should be made after the order is issued with the approval of the government.
7.9 Daily payment on Central Foodgrain Procurement Portal (CFPP) of the Central Government.
There are directions from the Food Corporation of India. Accordingly, the Agencies shall procure Paddy / Millets.
Fill in the information in the D1 and D2 returns and submit it to the Food Corporation of India and the state government as well as the BeAM.
They have to be presented. BeAM should collate this information and update it to CFPP.
A copy of the same was also submitted to the Food Corporation of India and the State Government on a daily basis.
should do.
7.10अभ Agencies concerned for paddy / coarse grains to be procured under the scheme
Verify the farmers' online 7/12 extract and Sample 8 (a). The need for
Digitally signed 7/12 and Sample 8A, if desired, can be purchased. The Presentation
Keep documents and other original records in their office. Procurement of Paddy / Millets
Amounts will not be paid by overpayment or submitting incorrect payments in the context,
The agent agency will be solely responsible for this. Purchase under this scheme by an agent agency
Reimbursement claims to the Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary for Paddy / Coarse Cereals
Weekly Purchase Statement, Form 'B' and 'C' along with the following certificate at the time of submission:
To be submitted: -
"It is certified that the amounts indicated in the claim have been previously provided for.
No. The originals in the claim are kept at the procurement centres / concerned office.
The Department of Agriculture has verified the 7/12, 8A, and PIKPERA along with the records for the area.
Page 17 of 41
# Page 18
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
The central government is responsible for ensuring that the paddy is purchased within the limit of the average income made.
As per the instructions, the transfer has been made to the bank accounts of the farmers concerned through PFMS. "
7.11सदर Claims for Amounts Total liability for excess / inaccuracy in payment of amounts submitted
The agent shall remain the agency and the amounts collected accordingly shall be the immediate financial advisor and the deputy secretary.
Will be returned to the office or recovered from the following claim.
7.12क Monthly stocks by the agent agencies as per the directions issued by the Central Government from time to time.
Required documents such as returns, gunny accounts, warehousing contracts, transport lease deeds, etc.
should be recorded.
7.13अभ Regarding procurement of Millets and Paddy by Agencies under Base Price Procurement Scheme
Detailed instructions on keeping separate accounts and submitting collateral information Financial Advisor
and be delivered immediately by the office of the Deputy Secretary.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
It is mandatory to keep the instructions as per the audited statements, utility.
Within 12 months from the end of the marketing season, along with certificates and relevant documents.
Submission to the Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary will be mandatory.
8) The control room: -
8.1आध Paddy / Millets to be procured under MSP procurement scheme
(Jowar, Bajra, Maize and Ragi) Regular Report to Central Government / Food Corporation of India
The sending process should be done through the Office of the Financial Advisor and the Deputy Secretary.
8.2सदर To have centralized control while implementing the scheme, at the district level and at the government level.
A control room should be set up. the District Level Control Room
Management should be done by agent agencies. Technical manpower, telephone facilities
The expenditure on the scheme is met from the administrative expenses received by the Central Government.
should be done. Any additional cost for the same will be borne by the State Government.
No. The keys of this control room shall be as follows: -
A. Action on complaints received regarding paddy procurement.
B. Act as a helpline for difficulties in the paddy procurement process.
C. Uploading information on the online portal for paddy procurement.
8.3अभ Daily district-wise procurement report by agencies by 5: 30 pm
Send to the control room at the government level and to the office of the financial advisor and deputy secretary. Related to
Purchases were made every Saturday evening by the collector and purchasing agent agencies.
The weekly report of paddy and millets procurement in the form of Annexure "I" shall be submitted to the Financial Adviser and
Submit a copy to the Office of the Deputy Secretary, Mumbai and send it to the Deputy Secretary (Minimum Support).
The price should be given to the purchase plan, blue 29).
9. Status of paddy procured under MSP scheme, foreign rice
Sale, purchase of paddy above average productivity, purchase at a price below the guaranteed price,
Procurement of Paddy by Traders / Brokers / Intermediaries, in any manner under the Scheme
Page 18 of 41
# Page 19
Government Decision Number: Purchase-1125 / P.No.182 / No. P. 29
Paddy / coarse cereals misappropriation / misappropriation / misappropriation and many more related to paddy procurement.
Complaints of malpractice are received. In such a case, the agent agency, the Collector's office,
Appropriate action is taken from time to time on their part by the District Supply Officer. However,
In some cases, it has been noticed that the government is not being informed about this.
Therefore, in such cases, submit a report to the government on the action to be taken at your level.
should be done.
10. Expenditure on purchase of paddy and millets is a personal deposit of the Financial Advisor and the Deputy Secretary.
From the article Demand No. M-4, Main article 4408 - Food storage and warehousing
Capital Expenditure, 01 - Food, 101 - Procurement Supply, (02) Procurement Distribution and Price Control, (02) (12) Mumbai
Procurement of Millets / Paddy under City Minimum Support Price Scheme (Mandatory) (4408 0382) 21 -
Supplies and materials should be made from the grants available under this head.
11. Supplementary expenditure for purchase of paddy and millets is as per demand no. M-4, Head of Accounts 4408-
Capital expenditure on food storage and warehousing, 01 - Food, 101 - Procurement and Supply, (02)
Procurement and Distribution and Price Control (02) (13) Mumbai City Under Minimum Support Price Scheme
Supplementary Expenditure on Millets / Paddy (Compulsory) (44080391) 50, Other Expenditure under the head
be made from available grants.
12. Procurement by Central Government at the approved rate in the Provisional Cost Sheet and ancillary
The amount of reimbursement for the expenses was paid by the Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary, Demand No. The M-4,
Headline 4408 Capital expenditure on food storage and warehousing, 01 - Food, 900, Capital
Deposits and Recovery on Accounts, (03) Procurement Distribution and Price Control, (03) (01) Mumbai City Minimum
Deposit and recovery of coarse grains / Paddy Capital Accounts under the Baseline Scheme (Compulsory)
(44080406) 70, minus recovery to be credited under the head 'Accounts'. Also, the District Supply Officer and
The Food Distribution Officer collected the above mentioned amount from the CMR sales.
(44080406) 70 should be submitted through the Gras system in the headings.
13. Informal Reference No. 665/2025 Expenditure10, d. 03.11.2025
It is being issued with the consent received under.
14.सदर Government Decisions are available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in
# Page 20
# Page 21
# Page 22
# Page 23
# Page 24
# Page 25
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37
# Page 38
# Page 39
# Page 40
# Page 41