# Page 1
Shopping in the Marketing Season 2025-26
Rice and rice
Regarding the fortification.
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection
Government Circular No: - Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
Mantralaya Extension, Mumbai-400 032
Date: November 20, 2025.
Read: -
1) Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection S.No. Purchase 1125 / Pt. No.182 / No. P. 29,
Date. 04.11.2023.
2) Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection S.No.2621 / P.S. No.303 / No. P. 29,
d. 17.10.2022.
3) Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection S. Circular No. Narrow-2621 / P. No.303
(Part 2) / No. p. 29, d. 24/03/2025.
4) Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Government Circular No.No. 2324 /
Q. No.178 / No.29, dated 07/10/2024
Government Circular: -
"Decentralized procurement" under the Minimum Support Price (MSP) procurement scheme for the marketing season 2025-26
The Scheme "To be implemented throughout the State Reference No. 1 was directed by a Government decision herein.
There are. Also Reference No. Minimum Support Price Purchase under Government Decision 2 & 3
The CMR (of rice) received from the bulk of the paddy procured under the scheme.
Instructions have been given for fortification. Accordingly, the purchase under the said scheme
It is necessary to begin the coagulation and rice fortification of the rice that occurs. It's a grain of rice
Agents Organizations (The Maharashtra State Co-operative Marketing Federation, Mumbai and Maharashtra State
Cooperative Tribal Development Corporation Limited, Nashik) as per the prescribed norms of the Central Government.
It has to be done.
(2) The period of coagulation: -
Agencies to ensure completion of the bidding period in the marketing season 2025-26
The last date for sowing paddy is July 31, 2026. Purchased
The work of paddy ploughing should be started at the earliest. One from the date of purchase of paddy
The agency agencies are required to ensure that the paddy is ploughed in months to a maximum of 2 months.
Make a pre-planning. For this, plan every month's rush and the rush will be completed accordingly.
This should be ensured.
# Page 2
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
3) District Coordination Committee for Jharai: -
The District Collector, with the help of agent agencies in the district, constituted the District Coordination Committee as follows:
Steps to be taken to set up: -
Table-A
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| A. No |                                                                                                                       |                  | Designation |   |   | the post of |
| 1     | the Collector                                                                                                         | The President's  |
| 2     | the District Superintendent Agriculture Officer                                                                       | The member's     |
| 3     | District Sub-Divisional Cooperative Societies                                                                         | The member's     |
| 4     | the District Supply Officer                                                                                           | The member's     |
| 5     | the Assistant District Supply Officer                                                                                 | The member's     |
| 6     | District Manager of Marketing Federation / Tribal Development Corporation (as per their respective geographical area) | Member-Secretary |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Responsibilities of the District Coordination Committee.-
Potable paddy fields near the procurement centre for the coagulation of paddy done by 4.1खर.
should be appointed.
4.2 Designated and non-complainant in the district of the previous season, having previous
The millers as well as the Government may from time to time declare that there is no surplus of Seasonal Paddy / Rice (CMR).
The agreement of the millers in the district fulfilling the conditions and conditions made.
Priority should be given to renovations for and through the marketing season 2025-26.
The process of coagulation should be carried out.
4.3 Crimes against millers against whom a case has been registered
The decision was taken by the District Coordination Committee after scrutinising all the documents regarding the release.
to take. Deputy Commissioner Supply in respect of decision taken in accordance with such millers.
The government should be informed about it.
4.4 Millers who have been blacklisted will have to pay a fine of Rs.
Work should not be given. Otherwise, the entire responsibility lies with the agent agency.
The officer will remain.
4.5 Millers who have rice / rice (CMR) balance of any of the previous seasons,
Such millers should not be given the job of ploughing paddy. Otherwise, it is entirely your responsibility.
The agent shall be the officer concerned of the institution.
4.6नव Strong evidence that the miller is the miller at the time of appointing the miller
should be taken. For example, Industry Registration Certificate of the mill, Agricultural Produce Market Committee
Page 2 of 38
# Page 3
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
Certificate of Procurement, Electricity payment for the last 3 months in the name of the mill, previous
3-year audit report (which should have net worth plus), Goods and Services Tax registration
Certificate and any previous season's paddy / rice (Custom Milled Rice - CMR). (a) The rest
No and no payment to the Government, on a stamp paper of ₹500 / -
An affidavit should be taken.
4.7 Millers who have started a new mill have the previous year's
Audit for millers as "audit report" may not be available
The condition of the report should not be made mandatory. Also, the mill is starting to run out of rice.
After receiving the power payment from the power company from the subsequent period.
to be made available by the millers.
4.8 Dynamic blending with rating prescribed by the Central Government by the creditors.
Installation of the machine is mandatory. This is ensured when selecting the millers.
The agent should be done by the agency. In selecting millers who do not meet this
If it does, the agent agencies will be responsible for it.
4.9 Linking of electricity consumption of mills with the milled as per the instructions of the Central Government
The quantity of Paddy is mandatory. of the miller to be appointed accordingly.
By providing the MSEDCL customer number to the BeAM through the respective agent agency.
should be given. If millers who do not meet this are selected, the
The agent agencies will have the overall responsibility.
With respect to 4.10फ Certified Rice, the above "Read No. Provided by the Government Decision at 2 & 3 "
Follow the instructions and the instructions issued by the government from time to time.
4.11ग Reference No. 4 of the instructions given by the Government herein.
must be complied with.
The 4.12स economic millers should be considered first. However, the area in which the paddy is ploughed
Appointment of millers from the adjoining district in such places where the number of mills is less.
If it is in the interest of the government, such millers should plough the paddy.
If so, such a proposal may be made by the agent agencies with the approval of the District Coordination Committee of the Government.
be sent for approval. Similarly, paddy should be milled in addition to the adjoining district.
If so, such proposals may be forwarded by the agency to the Government with the approval of the District Coordination Committee.
to be submitted. The agent agencies will be responsible for submitting such proposals to the government.
4.13गडच Paddy procured under the scheme in Riroli district increases in the stipulated time
Not happening / remaining unattended over the past few seasons
It has come. Government paddy to be left unutilised and not to be damaged.
The Collector, Gadchiroli, will collect paddy from the millers in the adjoining districts.
Proposals must be submitted to the government for adoption. The Deputy Commissioner, (Supplies) Nagpur has issued a notification in this regard.
In coordination with the District Collectors of the adjoining districts of Gadchiroli
Complete the necessary steps.
Page 3 of 38
# Page 4
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
The District Coordination Committee shall hold its review meeting every 15 days. CMR claims reimbursement
Amount Issue No. Regarding the transfer to the personal register account mentioned in section 6.15.
Weekly Review and Report to the Deputy Secretary (Minimum Support Price) and Financial
Submission to Advisor & Deputy Secretary, Food, Civil Supplies & Consumer Protection Department District
The supply officer will be obligated.
Hearing and adjudication of complaints against millers regarding 4.15भरड.
If the decision of the committee is not accepted, the millers appeal to the concerned Divisional Commissioner.
can be entered. Appeal filed against the decision of the Divisional Commissioner to the Government
It can be done.
4.16म Central Government to extend the deadline for paddy sowing in the next marketing season due to various reasons
A proposal had to be submitted. Paddy sowing operations in the current marketing season
Picking up the rice to make it sticky for the time being Fortified by pounding the rice
Time limit for deposit of rice / CMR in Government Warehouse (minimum 1 month)
The programme will be planned as per the guidelines prescribed by the Government from time to time.
The agent agency should inform the government.
4.17क As per the directions of the Central Government, the paddy purchased must be ploughed within the prescribed time.
There will be a deficit in the paddy purchased from the farmers by storing it in the open.
There is a possibility. Therefore, the purchased paddy is left in the open for more than two weeks.
Plan for immediate stockpiling of such paddy in case storage conditions arise
The purchased paddy will not be left in the godowns for more than 2 months.
For this, a monthly load should be planned to be lifted as soon as possible.
A review meeting is held every month to review the progress of the crop.
Make sure it is. The agency should inform the government about this.
4.18ध All millers who have been contracted for collateral 7 since the contract was made
Delivery order (DO) of the first lot of rice for millet within days. (a) has been given
Whether or not it is, it should be controlled and reviewed. rice on a regular basis as well.
Review the delivery order. The agency has informed the government about this.
Do it.
In the case of 4.19ध, the above is given as well as given from time to time in order to meet the deadlines.
Follow the instructions carefully and make sure that the rice is cooked within the stipulated time.
The responsibility will lie with the agent agencies.
Fortified Rice from Paddy procured in 4.20ज District / CMR
Storage capacity in the district in line with distribution under the Public Distribution System
It should be created and reviewed from time to time. The report should be submitted to the government.
CMR generated by estimating district procurement even before the start of 4.21भरड
Necessary planning should be done to deposit in the base godowns in the district.
Considering the available godown capacity in the district, additional godowns required are rented out.
The proposal should be submitted to the government. the Central Government / State Government
The suggestions given from time to time should be taken into account for this. Renting private warehouses
Page 4 of 38
# Page 5
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
It is recommended to hire warehouses that will allow smooth vehicular movement throughout the year.
It should be done by the government. This should be verified by the District Supply Officer.
The capacity of the mills near the godowns, in the area, while renting out the warehouses.
Only by ensuring the storage capacity of the godowns and the godowns directly required by the government.
Proposals for warehouses should be submitted. Proposals for non-essential capacity will be submitted to the government.
Don't.
Responsibilities of the agent agency: -
5.1 Procurement of Paddy under the Scheme by time bound ploughing and fortification of Paddy.
The fortified CMR generated from it is passed on to the government by the millers within the prescribed time frame.
Depositing is the responsibility of the agent agencies. Appointment of agents from agencies for this purpose.
Sub-agent agencies and millers over agent agencies are required.
They will control everything.
5.2 With the approval of the District Coordination Committee, the millers who meet the terms and conditions
Reference by agent agency for the current season including District Supply Officer
4 The government here shall enter into a tripartite agreement within the prescribed time frame as specified in the resolution.
5.3 In its agreement with the Millers, the Government's priority for the milling of rice and
Rice Fortification as well as Poor Fortification by Millers
If rice / CMR (CMR + FRK) is deposited, the millers are required to make the rice coarse.
In case of delay, the concerned millers will be penalized as per the law by the District Collector.
These and other necessary provisions to be made by them shall be the main ones to be included.
5.4 In entering into a tripartite agreement with the outside district millers, after the approval of the Government,
The district from where the agent agencies are to supply the paddy to the millers for ploughing.
Take the signature of the district supply officer of the district. However, a large amount of
CMR / Fortified Rice will be collected in the district where it is going to be ploughed.
to be distributed under the Public Distribution System there.
5.5कर Bank Guarantee Deposit as notified by the registered millers in the prescribed manner
After this, the process of giving lots for paddy ploughing needs to be done quickly.
Miller-wise Lot Distribution Information District Marketing Officer / Regional of the concerned district
The manager should immediately make it available to the district supply officer.
5.6 Regarding the milling capacity as well as the blending capacity of the employed millers.
To be submitted by the Information Agents to the District Coordination Committee and the Government in the prescribed format.
is obligatory.
5.7अभ Relates to the list of millers blacklisted by the agency
The District Collectors shall not be appointed before the appointment of the millers for the new season.
Send an error. Submit a copy to the Government (Deputy Secretary, Minimum Support Price)
should be done. Similarly, those blacklisted during the last three years /
5 out of 38 pages
# Page 6
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
Records of the lists of millers proposed to be disposed of by the Government with reasons to be noted
Suggestions to submit, should be submitted accordingly.
5.8उपर The said point no. 5.3 In the event of non-compliance by the millers, similarly fortified
In case of non-deposit / late deposit of rice in designated godowns, agreement with the Government.
Tripartite on such matters if rice coagulation and fortification are not done on priority after
It is mandatory to include a provision for punitive action in the contract.
5.9 Delivery Order of Paddy (D.O.) ) Within seven days from the date of purchase of paddy.
It must be paid to the designated miller. Paddy Distribution Order on BeAM Portal
It should be done online. Paddy delivered offline in any case
Delivery orders will not be charged. In order to order the distribution of such kind of paddy
For this purpose, the District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager of the Agencies shall be
The responsible will be held accountable and the government will take action against those involved in the case.
This should be noted.
Millers who have been contracted for a 5.10ध mill are required to pay for their mill's and
A Distribution Order (D.O.) of rice of fortification capacity should be issued. than the capacity of the
Excess rice should not be given to the miller for over-harvesting. Last Kharif as well as Rabi season
Priority was given to certain millers while ordering the distribution of paddy.
As noticed, paddy distribution orders to millers in the marketing season 2025-26
The proposed draft of the (DO) should be placed before the committee within 2 weeks. In addition to the agreement
Delivery orders to the millers arriving in a comprehensive manner as per the performance of the mill.
Be careful what you offer.
5.11अभ Paddy and government grants for millets given by agencies at the end of every week
Combined District-wise Return of Fortified Rice / CMR deposited in Warehouse
Deputy Secretary (Minimum Support Price) and Deputy Secretary with Acceptance Receipt.
It is necessary to send the financials to the salesperson.
5.12अभ The following are the priorities of the agency while handing over the paddy to the millers for replenishment:
It should be.
A. Paddy stored in the open under exceptional circumstances.
B. Paddy stored in private godowns.
Paddy stored in the godowns of cooperative societies.
E. Paddy stored in godowns of government / agent agencies.
Paddy stored in A to E above, the first purchased paddy will be the first to be milled.
(First In First Out) Payments to millers and monthly stock statements for this type of stocking.
It will be necessary to keep up to date online.
5.13अभ Agencies by contract from millers to the prevailing government
Take a bank guarantee according to the procedure.
6 out of 38 pages
# Page 7
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
5.14अभ Maximum after paddy harvest by agencies, i.e. 67%, fortified
Priority should be given to the miller willing to deposit rice / CMR so that
There will be no rice left without the jaggery.
Milling capacity, fortification of the miller while giving 5.15ध for milling
capacity) and the nearest distance to transport should be considered primarily.
5.16ग The amount of grain that will be given to the borrower throughout the season, taking into account his or her ability to grow.
Guarantee that the given paddy will be plucked before the end of the season within the prescribed time.
It is mandatory to take from the miller.
Mentioned in 5.17स. Clarification in Government Circular dated 7th October, 2024
In general, a minimum of 0.8 units of electricity is consumed per hectare of rice.
Make sure it is happening. The concerned District Marketing Officer /
The regional manager is to be done by the tribal corporation. A minimum of 0.8 units of power
If there is no expense, the miller will incur additional costs and transportation costs, as well as
Contingent payments should not be made. The matter was immediately referred to the Government (Deputy Secretary,
Not the minimum base price. P. 29) They need to be submitted.
The scheme is reimbursed by the central government according to the amount of rice collected.
Various portals have been launched by the central government for this purpose. The agencies of their
Level entries should be completed on the portal within the stipulated time frame. Millers also beam
Proper records have been taken on the system as well as on the central government portal or how
Reviews should be made by agent agencies from time to time. Delay from millers / non-receipt
If it is noticed that it is being done, it should be corrected immediately otherwise
Such millers should not be lifted for paddy ploughing.
5.19ग Rancher ploughs rice into fortified rice / CMR government godown
After the deposit is made, the warehouseman takes it over BeAM's computer system.
Further paddy should be made available to the millers on the basis of records.
5.20क The shopping center in question, its shopping capacity, and the shopping objectives attached to that center,
Also, information about the number of millers and their mill's thickness and blending capacity, etc.
to the control room.
5.21ग CMR / Fortified Rice deposited by the landlord in the Government Warehouse
Within 10 days of making and submitting the payment, the agent agency prescribes fees and other expenses.
It is mandatory to pay the rate to the mill owner online from the BeAM platform.
5.22अभ Agencies Deputy Secretary of Payment for Paddy Transport (NO.29 / Minimum Support Price)
Submit to the Ministry, Mumbai, Deputy Secretary and Financial Advisor. While presenting
A certificate of transportation to and from the nearest mill is required.
The payment for this transportation will also be determined by the SoR for the marketing season 2025-26.
Make sure to pay according to the schedule of rates.
7 out of 38 pages
# Page 8
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
If the agent agencies have a balance of paddy after the expiry of the 5.23भरड period, the balance
The agent agencies will be fully responsible for the paddy. the purchase of these grains and other
No ancillary expenses will be admissible to the agent agencies. Also, as much as the grain
The amount of rice that becomes rice (CMR) is fixed by the central government for that period.
The amount at the rate of the economic cost incurred is credited to the government by the agent agencies.
It has to be done. The administrative / ancillary of the agent agencies after all such amounts have been deposited.
Costs will not be provided. as well as any leftover rice that has not been milled
The incidental costs will not be paid to the agent agencies. determined by the central government.
The agent agencies will be responsible for completing the fill-in period. For this
As per the instructions given in the government decision, the paddy should be harvested within the stipulated time.
Necessary action should be taken.
5.24प Experience has shown that in some cases, the miller picks up the rice.
They then transport each other to other places. to prevent such cases from occurring.
Agent agencies should exercise effective control over the millers. in the prescribed manner.
The agent agencies should ensure that the transportation is being done by the millers.
Such cases should be reported to the government immediately. such as this
Paddy should not be given to millers for ploughing.
Responsibilities of the District Supply Officer: -
6.1 By fortification with coarse grains from the date of delivery order.
Fortified rice / CMR is deposited in a government designated warehouse within 10 days.
To make sure it is.
6.2 The mill holder of the rice mill in which the mill was crushed shall be next to him.
within the prescribed time limit as may be prescribed by the District Supply Officer within the geographical area.
It is mandatory to submit the CMR. Otherwise, in this Government Circular, Issue No. In the 7.2.
Punitive action should be taken as per the provision.
Warehouses in the premises of the 6.3 mill should not be taken for CMR. In CMR warehouses
CCTV cameras in warehouses to ensure that the weight cuts are functional.
The recording should be stored in a pen drive by the warehouse owner. Similarly, the
Make sure the recording is lot-wise. the District Supply Officer
Take control of it. This recording was made available on demand by the government.
It will be necessary to give. Punitive action against the concerned if the recording is not made available
will be done.
6.4 It will be mandatory to install CCTV system in the godowns designated by the government. Sadar
The cameras should be installed in such a place so that the rice that is collected, the rice that is distributed,
Traffic jams, etc. will be clearly filmed. Filming takes place every 15 days.
Copying to a pen drive will be required. Related to this 15-day shoot
Will be saved from the warehouse owner. The District Supply Officer
8 out of 38 pages
# Page 9
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
There will be control. The shooting should be done on demand from the government and during the inspection.
A pen drive must be provided. Center for the Cost of Installing a Camera in a Warehouse
to be met from the administrative expenses to be sanctioned by the Government and related
The District Supply Officer makes its payments through the Deputy Commissioner Supply to the Deputy Secretary Blue.
29 also to be submitted to the Financial Adviser and the Deputy Secretary.
6.5 Rented warehouses in the district for acceptance of fortified rice.
Making the information available to the government as well as on the BEAM portal.
6.6जर If the rice is given to millers in other districts by the government for replenishment,
If the government does not give other instructions in this regard, the district in which the paddy will be ploughed will be covered.
Collect fortified rice from the District Supply Officer of the same district.
There will be responsibilities. The Central Government may prescribe while collecting such fortified rice.
It should be done according to the norms.
6. 7 Point No. 5.1 Control of such proceedings.
6. 8 Point No. Reviewing whether or not rice is given for grazing according to 5.12.
6.9 Distribution of Fortified Rice under Public Distribution System as per instructions of the Central Government
It has to be done. Hence, purchases made under the Minimum Support Price (MSP) purchase scheme
While submitting the CMR received from paddy, the government on fortified rice
The criteria issued from time to time should be checked. Rice meets the prescribed criteria
should be collected. The guidelines issued by the Central Government for the same.
Follow up with updates from time to time. (Annexure - 8) Fortified Rice
After the millers are picked up by the agent agencies to create them, they are fortified.
Rice kernels (FRK) should be made available to millers.
6.10ज According to the quantity of lifting given by the District Supply Officer to the agent agencies, it is
The FRK (Fortified Rice Kernels) required in the limit of miller-wise lot is assigned to the designated millers.
It is mandatory to make available.
6.11श After receiving the fortified rice at the local warehouse and sending it for dispatch
The warehouseman's computer updated records were taken on BEAM's system.
To review how or if they are. From the warehouseman if such records are not up to date
Take action against them as needed.
6.12फ Certified rice after being sent to other districts for allotment, to be given by the government
Appointments received, actual withdrawals reported to the Government (Deputy Secretary, Minimum Support
Price) will have to be submitted by the end of the month.
CMR deposited in 6.13ग deposits given by Central and State Government from time to time
Necessary control over how warehousing is done by complying with instructions
should be done.
9 out of 38 pages
# Page 10
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
6.14फ Three from the date of distribution of certified rice to the Public Distribution System
Repayment claims for the day to the office blue 29 napu29.mhpds@mah.gov.in
This e-mail should be submitted online as well as to the financial advisor and deputy secretary.
This information is provided by the Office of the Secretary, Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection, Ministry of
Mumbai 32 should also be given.
The proceeds from the sale of IMR / rice come from the Office of the Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary.
Depositing to a personal ledger (PLA) account. Details of these account numbers
Suggestions should be made as follows.
RBI PLA A / c-4408 FAIR PRICE SHOP SCHEME, RESERVE BANK OF INDIA,
FORT, PAD MUMBAI Account No. 01514501075, IFSC Code - RBISOMBPA04 "
6.16फ Accurate information about the allocation, lifting, and distribution of certified rice by the government
Available on Google Sheets no later than the 15th and 30th of each month
Updating the error.
A bill of lading under the 6.17क Basic Price Scheme
The CMR in the directive is submitted by the concerned godown manager, district supply officer.
Immediately register on the central and state government websites.
Responsibilities of millers: -
7.1पणन Season 2025-26 The millers assigned to the plough in the ploughing season 2025-26
An immediate tripartite agreement for the 2025-26 season.
When the agent / DMO / RMO issues a Distribution Order (DO) to the millers
The miller's lifting of the paddy within 7 days is otherwise liable for the delay.
The miller will be fined 70 paise per quintal per delay day.
7.3 Coarse rice in 10 days after lifting (CMR). ) In the government warehouse.
to be collected. Otherwise, a penalty of 10 per cent will be levied on the CMR price.
The above penalty is the bank guarantee of the miller / the collateral / transportation payable to the miller.
A sum of money should be recovered from the cost contribution.
Transporting 7.4उचल made rice, safe storage of rice in the mill,
Weighing the fortified rice and filling it in the vehicle. For this, insurance will be taken out on occasion. However,
The government will not pay for it.
7.5 Centre on vehicles transporting paddy and rice at the time of contract by the tenant
It is mandatory to install GPS systems as per government instructions. to act accordingly.
Come.
7.6 Registration of millers on FoRTrace website as per the instructions of the Central Government.
is obligatory.
Page 10 of 38
# Page 11
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
7. Paddy arrived in the field and fortified rice sent to the godown.
Keeping up-to-date records on BeAM's system. Traffic jams if records are incomplete
E. will not be paid.
7.8 Acceptance Receipt of Fortified Rice by the concerned miller
Depositing to the agent agency immediately and late in two days.
At the 7.9भरड I Centre, as directed by the Food Corporation of India, on 29 May. Lot of Tonnes (290 sq.ft.)
to make.
Set up a CCTV camera at the 7.10भरड station and save the recording to a pen drive.
The image will need to be copied to the pen drive every 15 days. The 15th
The day's filming will be saved from the millers. the district on them.
The supply officer will be in control. On demand from the government as well as at the time of inspection
A pen drive for this shot must be provided. Don't make such a film
If this is done, the pile-up center will be eligible for cancellation.
Responsibility for transportation of 7.11ध rice and fortified rice / CMR: - Purchase at Shopping Centre
The rice transported to the paddy mill and received the bulk of the money.
Agent to deliver the fortified rice to the designated government warehouse.
The mill owner appointed by the institutions will remain. Agents appointed by the agencies on their behalf
No malpractice / irregularity on the part of the millers to be committed.
They should be effectively controlled and all necessary measures should be taken for this.
All products such as bran, husk, etc. received during the 7.12भरड season will remain with the mill owner.
No amount will be charged from them for this.
Rubbery rollers are expected to provide 5% to 7% polish when 7.13भरड is applied.
7.14क Fits in the allocation set by the Central Government for the season 2025-26
It is mandatory to have CMR / fortified rice. (Addendum No. 6, 7, and 8) as follows:
Not stocking of fortified rice which does not fit the prescribed input, the rice (CMR) and
Replacement of FRK. This action is taken within 7 days of receiving the complaint.
If the mill owner does not, they should not be given further work in the current season.
8. The following are the suggestions of the Central Government for the increase of paddy in the marketing season 2025-26:
are being given subject to orders. All orders of the Central Government in this regard shall be made by the Agent
It will be binding on the firm and the millers.
8.1उत Ration: At least 67 per cent (67 kg) of rice from a one-cup rice flour
(CMR) should be obtained.
8.2 Paddy Flow: - Rice is distributed under the Public Distribution System in the state.
Hence, the rice purchased under the Base Price Procurement Scheme is for rice.
(CMR) abrasion procedures should be done first.
11 out of 38 pages
# Page 12
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
Rate of Interest: - The interest rate fixed by the Central Government and the State Government.
2025-26 will remain in effect for this season.
8.4 Handling of Paddy: - Landing, handling and crushing of paddy in the paddy mill, as well as the centre.
Fits in the criteria set by the government for gunny bags in the marketing season 2025-26
In bales, with double stitching, filling of fortified rice, as well as weight of fortified rice
It will be the responsibility of the mill owner to pay the tax in the vehicle.
8.5 Considering the past few seasons, it has come to the notice of the Government that at least
With the government to increase the amount of rice purchased under the base price procurement scheme
They refuse to mow the paddy for various reasons, even though they have signed a contract for millets. The Season
Paddy purchased in 2025-26 is not being loaded in the prescribed time.
If noticed, either for the state through the government or for a district at the district level.
by way of an Expression of Interest (EOI) or any other
Paddy ploughing will be done.
The quality of the CMR
9.1 Quality of CMR at the time of submission of CMR as per the norms prescribed by the Central Government.
It should be checked.
IGMRI, Hapur, Hyderabad and Meerut to provide trained quality controllers to the people.
Nomination of officers / staff of the trained district to the Government (Deputy
Secretary, Minimum Support Price Scheme) should be done.
9.3 Districts in which a trained Quality Controller is trained to perform the functions
Trained quality controllers are available at locations where officers / staff are not available.
Submit a proposal to the Government (Deputy Secretary, Minimum Support Price Scheme)
should be done.
9.4 In addition, if additional quality controllers are required, Indian food
Proposal of officers / staff trained by the Corporation submitted to the Government
should be done.
9.5 CMR to be collected by the designated quality controllers from the Central Government
Careful examination should be done as per the norms. District Reports of Investigations to be Conducted
Submit to the supply officer.
9.6 CMR from Central team / Food Corporation of India in mills / warehouses /
Immediately after inspection at base warehouses / fair price shops, such inspection shall be done.
Reporting to the Government (within 1 week of inspection) District Supply Officer
They will be obligated. Fulfillment after receipt of the report of such inspection.
Submission of Report to State Government along with Central Government / Food Corporation of India District
The supply officer will be obligated.
12 out of 38 pages
# Page 13
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
The CMR is examined by the Central team before receiving the report of such CMR.
CMR examined in such cases to prevent CMR from being delivered.
CMR under the Public Distribution System unless the inspection report is received.
should not be distributed. If such a CMR is delivered, it is the sole responsibility of the
The District Supply Officer will be his / hers. CMR examined by Central team
Follow-up by the District Supply Officer for receipt of the report at the earliest.
Do it.
9.8 It has been observed from past experience that the CMR has been examined by the Central team.
Central Government on rice declared as BRL / Beyond FSSAI by millers
Millers refuse to act according to the standards. Hence, the Central Bureau of Investigation
Related to replacement of rice declared by BRL / Beyond FSSAI after inspection
Millers should be notified immediately. District Marketing by District Supply Officer
Officers / Regional Managers to the millers on behalf of the Central Government.
Be informed to act according to the instructions.
9.9. Borrower to act as per BRL / Beyond FSSAI standards / by substituting rice
If not willing to pay, the agent agencies will place the next DO order for the paddy husk.
Agencies should immediately report this to the government.
9.10अश On stopping millers from piling up and the government from time to time
The District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager to take other action as per the instructions given.
The manager should submit a proposal to the district coordination committee. As well as about
The government should be informed.
10. Bardana: -
Government Decision on Purchase and Use of Barley in 10.1पणन Season 2025-26, No.
1125 / P. No. 182 / Blue-29, D. 15.10.. should be processed according to the terms and conditions stated in 2025.
Also Karyasana-16B from Anapu and Grahasambhi, Mantralaya, Mumbai Old and New
Both agent agencies should follow the instructions given from time to time regarding the card.
The 10.2ब color coding of the order (Pair No. (2) The Government's decision with respect to the purchase of
1125 / P. No. 182 / Blue-29, D. Follow the instructions in the 3.11.2025. As well as previously
The obligation to submit to the government an account of new and old gunny bags purchased
Agents will remain agencies.
10.3क Central Government Circular No. 15-14/2018 Py.III, d. 13.12.2018 and d. 12.05.2017
Instructions regarding old / new gunny bags to be used for paddy / CMR storage under
The agent agencies will be responsible for compliance. Also heavily fortified
Accounting for grain from millers within 7 days of rice / CMR submission
After completing the balance of the bardana as per the rules, it is used for the purchase of paddy.
13 out of 38 pages
# Page 14
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
The agent agencies will be responsible for bringing in. the office of the Department in respect of the aforesaid
According to the regulatory procedures (SOPs) issued by 16B, agent agencies
It will be mandatory to take action.
Rice (C.M.R.) ) Advance Programme of Acceptance: -
The millers appointed by both the agent bodies and the Collector are as follows:
How many vehicles of rice (CMR) are in the designated government godowns on each date of the week?
Advance information (mill-wise advance programme) to be sent to the district for submission.
supply to the authority and for this, immediate confirmation of the concerned should be taken and
Vehicles must be shipped as scheduled on the date of such acceptance. It has been agreed that
Mill-wise CMR / Fortified Rice Related as per schedule
It should be deposited in the prescribed government godown by the mill owner.
In which case to collect rice (CMR) from the District Supply Officer.
In case of delay, the concerned District Marketing Officer / Regional Manager
They should specifically keep a case-by-case record. In the event that such an action
Delay in depositing rice (CMR) without the fault of the miller.
No penal action will be taken against the mill owner in the case.
In which case, the miller will be responsible for the late deposit of rice (CMR).
In such cases, the miller will be charged 15 per cent interest on the cost of rice (CMR).
should be assessed. The date-wise pick-up given to the miller,
The actual lifting from the miller, as directed by the miller
The government should be kept informed by the agent agencies about the date-wise rice actually deposited.
(Deputy Secretary, Minimum Support Price) to be submitted. If such penalty / interest is recovered
The recovery is made by the respective agent agencies to the Office of the Financial Advisor and the Deputy Secretary.
Report the deposit to the Deputy Secretary (Minimum Support Price) from time to time.
The date-wise offer of vehicles in this regard has been approved by the District Supply Officer.
Vehicles, vehicles actually dispatched, vehicles accepted by the District Supply Officer and
The remaining vehicles are reported to the District Collector by the agent agencies every week.
It should be submitted online without fail to the government.
12. The concerned miller shall immediately reach the deposit of fortified rice / CMR or
Deposits must be made to the agent agencies within two days of the late date. Paddy purchased
Access to deposit of coarse fortified rice / CMR
Fortified by District Supply Officer / Assistant District Supply Officer while delivering
It should be ensured that rice / CMR is directly deposited in the designated godowns of the state government.
Fortified daily by a Quality Controller appointed by the District Supply Officer.
Online registration of at least 15 lots of rice / CMR will be required. However,
Page 14 of 38
# Page 15
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
Rice (CMR) prescribed by the government by multiplying the paddy purchased under this scheme.
The agent agencies will be solely responsible for the deposit in the warehouse.
Paddy and prescriptions given by agent agencies for each weekend's millets
Consolidated Return of Fortified Rice / CMR deposited in Government Warehouse
Along with the receipt (Annexure No. 1 & 4) District wise Financial Adviser & Deputy Secretary, Mumbai
It should be sent to them and a copy should be sent to the concerned Collectorate. agent
Compensation of compounding costs on the basis of consolidated returns and receipts submitted by the institutions.
Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary, Mumbai. Through agent agencies
CMR / Fortified rice claims if deposited in government godowns.
For reimbursement, the agent agency must act as above.
13. Bank Guarantee and Indication Amount -
13.1इस Amount and Deposit - Rs from millers willing to join
50,000 / - as well as the amount sanctioned to such millers for the total addition.
Paddy loading cost plus estimated transportation cost for paddy loading.
5 per cent of the total value of both the deposits in the name of the nationalised bank to the agent agency,
Deposits will need to be made by check or online.
13.2अभ Nationalized by agencies from all millers for at least one year
Or take a guarantee from a scheduled bank and the bank will complete the final accounting.
The duration and validity of the guarantee should be extended adequately and in a timely manner. The government
It has been observed that lifting of paddy without adequate deposit of bank guarantee.
is given as well as the nationalized or scheduled bank.
A bank guarantee is credited to the other bank. If such matters come to the notice of the Government,
Action will be taken in this regard.
13.3ग Verification of the authenticity of the bank guarantee submitted by the borrower by the bank concerned
Agents will be mandatory for agencies.
13.4ग The borrower will have to give the bank guarantee agent to the agency before signing the agreement.
The 13.5स security deposit and bank guarantee will be refunded upon completion of the transaction.
Interest will not be allowed.
The creditors should deposit a bank guarantee in proportion to the value of the money. (Bank Guarantee)
= Rs. 2369 per quintal of Paddy + the amount and deposit indicated by the miller
the amount).
FDR / TDR can be taken instead of the 13.7ब bank guarantee. It should be the same as the value of the bank guarantee.
It should also be in the name of the FDR / TDR agent organization and of sufficient duration and
The agent must be in the custody of the organization.
to file cases against the concerned in case of misappropriation of (CMR) of (ID1) rice or
In case of delay in lifting, loading and storage of rice CMR / Fortified Rice
The agent agencies should take action to recover the compensation in a timely manner. In regards to this
A report should be submitted to the government.
Page 15 of 38
# Page 16
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
If there is a shortfall while depositing the 13.9स CMR, it is one and a half times the fixed rate of the CMR.
Amount and Amount to be fixed / made by the Government for fortified rice
The agent agencies should recover and pay to the government in a timely manner.
14.सन 2025-26 This season is dedicated to paddy ploughing. The deadline is set for July 30, 2026.
It has come. Shopping followed by rush to avoid delays in rush.
Action should be initiated. increased in any case from the government level.
Considering the fact that no request will be made to the Centre for a time frame.
CMR prescribed by the concerned millers by completing the milling within the given time frame.
Deposits in government warehouses will be mandatory.
15. In case of non-completion of paddy ploughing within stipulated time, with such millers.
The manager of the agency has full authority to cancel the contract entered into.
The directors will remain. the amount indicated in the cancellation of the contract with the millers and
The agent agencies should immediately deposit the government with the seizure of the reserve amount. As well,
The amount of paddy and CRM remaining with the millers.
The government should collect from the bank guarantee of the millers and deposit it.
16. Procurement Agents visited the paddy mill from time to time and carried out the work.
Get checked and have effective control. the Collector, District Supply Officer
Or the Assistant District Supply Officer also reviews the work done from time to time.
Take it.
17. Subject to instructions and directions of the Central Government (F.A.Q. (a) Fortified
Names of millers who will not deposit rice / CMR within the prescribed time limit
The condition that will be blacklisted should be included in the contract. Above
In addition to the instructions, other terms and conditions that may be considered appropriate by the purchasing agent are included.
The contract will be completely free to do so.
18.अभ Agencies must complete the fill-in process immediately to cover the final costs, including procurement and fill-in.
The Central Government. Necessary documents as indicated in the letter of 19.08.2015 and
The financial advisor and the deputy secretary with the evidence have six months from the end of the procurement season.
Must be submitted within the prescribed time.
19.उपर Proposal to finalize the ancillary expenditure based on the above suggestions to the Central Government
Submission will be made for approval and after approval, the ancillary costs to the agency will be final.
will be approved.
To enter into and enter into agreements with millers in accordance with the above guidelines.
Deposit of Fortified Rice / CMR is done by the respective agent agencies.
It should be completed within the stipulated time immediately and the weekly progress report regarding the same should be submitted to the government.
be submitted.
16 out of 38 pages
# Page 17
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
21. Transport: -
Transportation of Paddy and Rice (CMR) under Minimum Support Price Procurement Scheme
The Government Decision as per the directions of the Central Government, No. The narrow-
2619 / P.S. 84 / N.P. 29 D. 16.08.2019 and thereafter from time to time
Determined by the committee constituted in accordance with the amendments.
The Collector should take action as per the SoR.
Regarding filling up of online information on BeAM and PFMS Portal regarding 22.भरड:
A. The Central Government. Purchase in accordance with the directions given under the letter 07.10.2013 and
Information about the deposit in the Public Fund Monitoring System (PFMS) / NeML Portal
The process of making available both the agent agency and the respective district supply
The officer should do it on a daily basis and it is done by the concerned Regional Manager, Indian Food.
should be made available to the corporation. Payment by Fee (PFMS) Portal
to be done through. (Annexure - 3)
b. All information about procurement under the Minimum Support Price (MSP) and Feedback Scheme
It is to be filled on the Central Food Grains Procurement Portal (CFPP) of the Central Government.
This information is currently being updated through the BEAMS portal.
There are strict instructions from the central government regarding the correct filling of this information. For this
The agent agencies associated with the scheme, the sub-agent agencies appointed by them,
The millers and the District Supply Officer shall ensure the correctness of the contract with them.
The information should be updated on the BEAMS portal. This information is available online on the portal.
Any payment to the miller / agent agency financials if not updated.
Payments will not be made by the office of the advisor and deputy secretary. As well as
The agent agencies have updated all the information related to them on the PFMS portal.
should do.
C. Paddy distribution orders, records of millers, their payments, CMR / Fortified
All the things like rice acceptance etc. will be deposited in the base godown.
CMR / Minimum Storage Specification for Fortified Rice
All concerned should ensure that the internal payment is done through the online system only.
23.सर General Notice -
a) Every month after the rice is distributed in the targeted public distribution system
Certificates Financial Advisor and Deputy Secretary, Office of the District Supply Officer, Mumbai
be submitted to their office. (See illustration in Annexure 5.) )
b) Once stored in a rented godown for submission of CMR
Make sure the CMR doesn't stay in the warehouse for more than 2 months.
should be taken.
17 out of 38 pages
# Page 18
Government Circular No: Dhanbh-1325 / P.No. 183 / Blue.29
c) Separately directing the storage and distribution operations of the CMR.
Will come.
d) Direct target-set distribution of rice in the public distribution system and its
The utility certificate should be submitted by the District Supply Officer.
e) Quality control in godowns and government warehouses as prescribed by the government.
The responsibility will rest with the District Supply Officer concerned.
25. Government Circular above, Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in
# Page 19
# Page 20
# Page 21
# Page 22
# Page 23
# Page 24
# Page 25
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37
# Page 38