# Page 1
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection
Government Memorandum No.Gr.S.A-2025 / P.No.136 / G.No.4
Madame Cama Marg, Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk, Mantralaya (Extension), Mumbai 400 032
Date: 05th June, 2026
Reference: 1. State Consumer Grievance Redressal Commission, Maharashtra, Mumbai No. RA / MA / Accounts /
e-Jagriti / 2025/7019 d. 25.11.2025 Letter of the Day
2.उपभ Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Department of Consumer Affairs, New Delhi
D.O.No.J-6/7/2023-CPU days क-19.11.2025
The memo: -
Government of India Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Department of Consumer Affairs, New Delhi
Reference No. To pay the case filing fee in the e-Jagriti platform system under the letter mentioned in 2.
Recommended by National Informatics Centre (NIC) Bharatkosh, PayGov, Razorpay and Bildask
Suggestions are to take the payment gateway service of one of these companies and sign an MoU with that company accordingly.
have been provided.
Case filed with State Consumer Grievance Redressal Commission, Maharashtra, Mumbai through CONFONET system.
Fees for making were accepted by the grass system. But now instead of the CONFONET system, the e-Jagriti platform
Government of India Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Consumer Affairs
The Department of Affairs, New Delhi, vide its letter dated क-19.11.2025, filed the case in the e-Jagriti platform system.
Bharatkosh, recommended by the National Informatics Centre (NIC) for filing fees,
PayGov, Razorpay, and Bildask offer a payment gateway service.
Regarding the approval, the State Consumer Grievance Redressal Commission, Maharashtra, Mumbai vide Reference No. 1 is requested.
Bharatkosh and PayGov, India are central government platforms / portals for payment gateways.
Therefore, the State Consumer Grievance Redressal Commission, Maharashtra, Mumbai has been sued in the e-Jagriti platform system.
PayGov's payment gateway service is being approved to pay the fee.
The memorandum is available on the Government of Maharashtra's www.maharashtra.gov.in website.