# Page 1
without permanent disability in the state.
Aided / Unaided Special Schools,
Affiliated hostels, workshops (training centres)
and the Government's policy regarding grant-in-aid for orphanage activities.
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Disability Welfare
Government Decision No: - EDD-2022 / P.No.65 / DC1
--------------------------------------------------------------------
| 31 / 32 / 35 "A" Wing, Mittal Tower, Barrister Rajni Patel Marg, |
| Nariman Point, Mumbai - 400021.                                  |
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Date: July 16, 2024
Read: -
Department of Social Justice, Cultural Affairs, Sports and Special Assistance, Government Decision Number: EDD-
2001 / P.S. No.502 / Corrections-2, D. July 19, 2003, Department of Social Justice, Cultural Affairs, Sports and Special Assistance, Government Decision No: ED-
2001 / P.S. No.502 / Corrections-2, D. December 4, 2003,
Department of Social Justice, Cultural Affairs, Sports and Special Assistance, Government Decision No: EDD-2001 / Q. No.490 / Reforms-2, D. On August 11, 2004,
Department of Social Justice, Cultural Affairs, Sports and Special Assistance, Government Decision No.: EDD-
2003 / Q. No.340 / Part-III / Corrections-II, D. August 18, 2004.
Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance, Government Decision No: EDD-2012 / PR. No.67 / A.
A. 1, dated April 08, 2015.
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
The Maharashtra Disability Schools, Training Centres and Homes for Children Code, 2018.
Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance, Government of India Decision No: Disabled-2013 / P.No.2017
Maharashtra State Divyangjan as defined under / ak-2, dated 20th February, 2019
Policy, 2018 9. Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance, Government Circular No.: EDD-2017 / PR. No.491 /
A.C. 1, dated May 12, 2021,
Department of Finance, Government Decisions, No: Narrow-2022 / Q. 27 / Finance, dated 8th June, 2022.
Letter No. 11.आय Mukt, Divyang Kalyan, Pune: DC / PR. All / Disabled Schools Policy / Information / 2023-24 / 410, dated 23rd March, 2023.
The Proposal: -
Special schools for the disabled, attached hostels, workshops (training centres) and orphans in the state.
Mentally Retarded Children's Homes are permanently run on a non-subsidized / non-subsidized principle. Sadar
Salary and non-salary grants are sanctioned to the enterprises based on the availability of funds from the government. Sadar
Read Activities No. 4 To issue, renew, or deny a certificate of registration under section 52 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 for non-compliance with the required criteria.
Or the competent authority to be appointed by the Government to cancel it is the Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, State of Maharashtra, Pune.
So it has been announced. The Special Schools for the Disabled Code 1997, Code No. By overriding the 5
# Page 2
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
The Government of Maharashtra has amended the Maharashtra Divyang Schools, Training Centres and Homes for Children Code, 2018.
The revised Government Decision dated 18th July, 2018 and dated 5th February, 2019 has come into force.
2. Read No. Read 6 under No. In accordance with the provisions of section 4, the Government of Maharashtra
The Maharashtra State Disability Policy, 2018 has been developed for the welfare of Divyangjans and is dated 20.
It has been implemented by the Government Decision dated February, 2019. It includes education, training of persons with disabilities,
To extend all possible support on the basis of availability of funds for employment, self-employment and their upliftment.
The state government has set a target.
3. Read No. Special Schools and Workshops for Persons with Disabilities under Sections 1 and 2 dated before 30 October 2002
It was functioning and is functioning at present and is headed by the Commissioner and Competent Authority, Divyang Kalyan, Maharashtra.
The State of Pune enacted the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (as amended).
and issued a certificate of registration in accordance with the provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016).
It is and has completed two years with a certificate of registration for such special schools / workshops.
It was provided that the grant would be considered eligible for consideration as per the policy of the Government.
It was No. 3 Specialized in Disabled Areas as per Government Decision dated 11th August, 2004
NGOs engaged in education, training, and rehabilitation are provided by the central government and local self-governments.
It will not ask for any kind of grant from the state government so that grants can be sought from the institutions.
Certificate of registration of such activities on the principle of permanent non-subsidy on the guarantee of the institution of such nature.
The policy of giving has been implemented.
Similarly, in Section 2 (5) of the School Code dated 18th July, 2018, without permanent
Provisions relating to grant-in-aid to Special Schools / Workshops for Aided / Unaided Persons with Disabilities
have been made, requiring a certificate of registration for approval on the principle of grant,
the economic, social, cultural, geographical and political policies, planning and funding of the government;
Removal of geographical imbalances, priority to schools / workshops for orphans and differently abled children, schools
The grading given to them after inspection has been included.
In the Government Decision dated 19th July, 2003 of the Department, the policy of grant-in-aid of the Department at that time.
It is not fixed. Also vide Government Decision dated 4th December, 2003 and 11th August, 2004
Current government decisions on grants to schools and workshops for people with disabilities have been put on hold.
have occurred. Similarly, the said provisions of the School Code, 2018 provide for grant-in-aid to the activities of persons with disabilities.
Not sufficient from the point of view of bringing it into principle. High Court of Maharashtra, Bench Aurangabad Writ Petitions
No. 10180/2012 (Rural Labour Organisation v. Government of Maharashtra & Ors.) The date of the court
Closed workshops as per order dated 2nd September, 2013 except for residential workshop policy for persons with disabilities.
Orders to formulate policy on grants to be given to such schools in case of non-residentialization
have been provided. As well as Ma. The High Court, Bench Nagpur in Writ Petition No. 3051/2019 (Khateshwar
Backward Classes Multipurpose Vocational Education Institute v. Government of Maharashtra & Ors.) the Court
Permanent Disability drive by NGOs vide order dated 6th September, 2021
Directions were given to formulate a policy for grant-in-aid to unaided / unaided special schools.
There are.
6. Orders of the High Court, taking into account the directions given by the Department of Finance from time to time, to the Divyangjan.
Permanently sanctioned Unaided / Unaided Special Schools / Workshops / Orphanage Children's Homes
The government was considering formulating a policy regarding government subsidies to be made.
Accordingly, the proposal. At the meeting of the Council of Ministers held on 5th July, 2024
Page 2 of 14
# Page 3
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
was presented. In this regard, Shri. Pursuant to the decision taken by the Cabinet, the permanent disability
The policy on bringing unsubsidized / non-subsidized activities on subsidy basis is being formulated as follows.
The Government's Decisions:
Department of Social Justice, Cultural Affairs, Sports and Special Assistance, Government Decision dated 19th July, 2003, dated 4th December, 2003 and dated 11th August, 2004 as well as Special Schools / Workshops
Other government decisions on the principle of subsidies are being superseded by this. as well as the school
Also in the Code, matters relating to inspection of schools / workshops for grant-in-aid should be dealt with in the Department.
The policy is being revised jointly.
2. Special Schools for Persons with Disabilities on permanent non-subsidized and non-subsidized basis.
Evaluation criteria for attached hostels, workshops (training centres) and orphanages
Special schools for persons with disabilities, attached hostels, workshops to be set up and qualified as per the criteria.
(Training Centre) and Orphanage Children's Homes (hereinafter referred to as "Disability Activities." )
Valid Registration from Permanent No Subsidy Principle to Non-Subsidy Principle and Non-Subsidy Principle
The policy of the Government on grant-in-aid principle by sanctioning Government grants to certified enterprises and for allied matters shall be as follows.
i. New Registration Certificate for Disabled Activities is now self-financing.
will be provided in principle. Also, self-financing with a fresh registration certificate issued.
Financing) activities will not be eligible for any government subsidy in the future.
ii. activities of persons with disabilities, in which a certificate of registration has been issued on the principle of permanent non-subsidy, any clause
10 years from the date of this certificate of enrolment on the number of students awarded to them without fail,
The activities of permanently unsubsidized Divyangs, which will make the interest normative by successfully continuing the schools, will be treated as "unsubsidized" after the end of this period. In addition to the non-subsidized
Registration of activities of persons with disabilities who have been granted a certificate of registration on principle as well as holding a gratuity.
After the expiry of a period of 5 years from the date of the certificate, it will thus be considered for approval on the "Subsidized" principle after the completion of a total of 15 years. emergencies such as COVID-19.
The period for which the activities of the differently abled are stopped for any other reason, except in the event of circumstances
To deduct from the calculation their eligibility period-wise eligibility as long as they are
It will come.
iii. State to Disability activities in the State funded by the Central Government or local bodies.
The government will not have the right to demand subsidies.
iv. The Department of Disability Welfare provides for disability activities on the relevant permanent non-subsidized / non-subsidized principle after they become eligible for grant-in-aid from the government if they have minority status.
All terms / conditions / regulations as may be prescribed from time to time with respect to service matters of the employees of the enterprise.
They will be obliged to comply and will be required to provide a warranty.
v. A certificate of fresh registration by an institution for one or more activities for persons with disabilities.
The demand shall be made to the competent authority in the prescribed manner.
Activities of persons with disabilities working in certain places, regional balance, geographical location, number of students / beneficiaries with disabilities there, admissions while issuing new registration certificate for the activity.
The number available, the balance declared by the government, to be provided for the disabled by the institution concerned.
Page 3 of 14
# Page 4
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
Facilities, basic amenities required as per prevailing norms, Special Schools for Persons with Disabilities and Affiliates
The competent authority has taken into consideration the broad framework approved by the Government with respect to hostels, workshops (training centres) and attached hostels and orphanages, etc.
As an initiative on the principle of self-financing in the respective special schools / workshops.
A new registration certificate will need to be provided. In doing so, it will state whether it is a residential or non-residential activity or how and the number of approved students / beneficiaries as well as male and female.
vi. Permanent non-subsidised / non-subsidised recognised minority status.
These schools will not be entitled to demand grants from the Department of Disability Welfare if the activities of the differently-abled are funded by the Department of Minority Development. In addition, the disabled
Minority development if the activities are to be funded by the Department of Disability Welfare.
No grants of any kind can be taken from the department.
vii. Aadhaar seeded to students / beneficiaries as well as all employees - without online biometric attendance
Any salary / non-salary / maintenance etc. to the Divyang Resident / Non-Resident initiative of the concerned institution.
No subsidy will be given. This is on the Aadhaar-enclosed-online biometric attendance system.
The attendance recorded will be checked by the competent authority and the government every month and accordingly, salary / non-payment / maintenance subsidy will be disbursed to the enterprise. The district society in this case
Welfare Officer, Zilla Parishad (concerned) or Assistant Commissioner, Social Welfare, (Mumbai Suburban)
and for the city) or other relevant authorities directed by the Department of Disability Welfare shall be the competent authority. Able to disburse grants without Aadhaar-enabled online biometric presence
The authorities will be held accountable and action will be taken accordingly.
viii. Disabled activities having valid recognition / registration certificate on non-subsidized basis.
The Government shall have the power to approve the grant-in-principle.
ix. The following are required to qualify for grant-in-aid for the organization operating the activities of the respective Divyangjan:
1) Valid Registration Certificate 2) On the basis of grant-in-aid to the activities of the differently abled in this regard.
Compliance with the criteria and division of marks as per the self-assessment chart under the form accompanying the Government Decision on Bringing in and Application accordingly 3) Approval of disabled activities by the Government.
Fulfillment of minimum eligibility criteria as prescribed from time to time 4) Employees in activities for persons with disabilities
Government procedure of appointment and adherence to reservation policy in respect of appointment. 5) Student support on the application and the adjacent three-month simplified system, depending on the number of students accepted.
and having been certified and verified as a student with a disability; and
Accordingly, the employee set is approved. 6) Audit reports for the last 3 years, 7) the nature of the institution,
8) List of members and designation of the Charity Commissioner.
x. Government to change / convert the categories of special schools and workshops in composite format.
Recognizes that accreditation will be required for special schools operating in certain locations at the time.
/ Workshops, Regional Balance, Geographical Conditions, Available Number of Entrants, Government Declared Reserves, Facilities provided for Persons with Disabilities by the institution concerned, In vogue
Necessary infrastructure facilities as per norms, special schools for the differently abled and attached hostels, workshops
The broad framework approved by the Government with respect to (training centres) and attached hostels and orphanages, etc. will be considered.
Page 4 of 14
# Page 5
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
xi. Assessment Criteria and Score-Splitting: - Subject-wise Score-Splitting of 100 marks in the assessment.
As with the decision form, it includes a total of 13 activity-related items.
xii. Scores required for grant eligibility: - Finally, according to the assessment criteria, which are recognized as non-grants.
In-principle disabled activities will get at least 75 marks out of a total of 100 marks.
The activities will be declared eligible for the grant. However, for this, it is mandatory for the quality of the activity to score at least 18 marks out of the prescribed 25 marks on items 1 to 4.
There shall be, in addition to any non-grant-in-aid-principle, activities for persons with disabilities on a grant-in-aid basis.
will not be eligible for recognition.
xiii. Eligibility Criteria: - Original registration given to the activities of the persons with disabilities concerned for determining the grant.
The date of the certificate is important as the date of issue of the certificate of registration of the activity concerned.
There will be criteria. In certain cases, where the date of registration certificate of activities of persons with disabilities is the same, the serial number of the relevant registration certificate will be taken into account for verification.
xiv. Transfer / relocation of discontinued disabled activities: - Without closure permanently
Transfer of management of activities of Aided / Unaided Persons with Disabilities to another competent authority and
The process of relocation or transfer of management of such ongoing special schools / workshops to another competent body or shifting of ongoing disabled activities from one place to another.
The policy will be modified from time to time by Government Decision, dated 15th February, 2019 or as the Government may deem fit.
That will be done. The date of renewal of registration certificate for activities of persons with disabilities transferred and transferred to such closed and other competent body as the date of incorporation.
Grays will be held. cancellation of the original registration certificate of the activities of the disabled who have been closed down, or
Registration of original disabled activities, if any, and subsequent transfers.
The date of the certificate shall in no case be construed as the date of issue. But,
Permanently unsubsidized / operational / ongoing as per prevailing policy of the Government.
Transfer of management of unaided disabled activities from one institution to another or
The above condition shall not apply to activities where there has been migration from one place to another.
xv. A Divyangjan's enterprise holding a certificate of registration in accordance with the present policy.
However, during the preceding five years, the certificate of registration of the activity of the concerned Divyangjan has been cancelled by the competent authority twice or more and is subject to an appeal order from the Government.
Reduced five points in the assessment of activities of such persons with disabilities if revived.
The date of the relevant certificate of registration is also the date of receipt of the fresh certificate of registration.
will be considered for execution.
xvi. Subsidy to the non-subsidized incremental number of students / beneficiaries in the activities of Subsidized Persons with Disabilities.
Even when granting approval, action should be taken according to the criteria in this policy.
xvii. Approval for conversion of non-residential activities of persons with disabilities into residential activities should also be acted upon in accordance with the norms of this policy.
3. Procedure for grant-in-aid to non-subsidised activities: -
Detailed information by self-assessment as per the criteria prescribed in the form accompanying the Government Decision by the governing parent organization of the activities of persons with disabilities desirous of grant-in-aid.
The Chief Executive through the Commissioner, Divyang Kalyan, Pune along with the supporting documents is as follows:
5 out of 14 pages
# Page 6
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
District Assessment constituted under the chairmanship of the officer, concerned Zilla Parishad
The committee will be required to submit a proposal by 31 October of the date of the relevant financial year.
The last three months of submission of application for grant-in-aid to Unsubsidized Disability Enterprises
Aadhaar-enabled online biometric attendance report of students and staff by the competent authority.
Certification and submission will be required.
the District Evaluation Committee
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 1) | Chief Executive Officer, concerned Zilla Parishad (concerned district) (Regional Deputy Commissioner, Social Welfare Department - Mumbai Suburban and City or other concerned officer directed by the Department of Disability Welfare)          | The President's      |
| 2) | Education Officer (Primary) in the concerned district - if there is a primary school activity or Education Officer (Secondary) - if there is a secondary school activity                                                                         | The member's         |
| 3) | District Social Welfare Officer, Zilla Parishad (concerned) or Assistant Commissioner Social Welfare, Mumbai Suburban and City (related to Mumbai Suburban and City) or other relevant officer directed by the Department of Disability Welfare. | the Member-Secretary |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Responsibilities of the District Evaluation Committee: -
Members of the Evaluation Committee All proposals received after the receipt of these proposals
The activities of the differently abled persons will be physically inspected on the basis of a self-assessment pattern.
They will prepare a report. At least one day before the physical examination, the relevant institution is informed of this.
will be done. If, for any reason, the Chairman of the Committee is unable to go to the inspection, he or she shall
Instead, additional CEOs have been nominated to oversee the activities of Divyangjan.
can do it.
These checks must be done in time for the relevant disability activities. the persons with related disabilities
Attach photo inspection reports of activities (including latitude / longitude), as well as disability welfare.
It will be required to be uploaded on the website of the Commissionerate. as well as the disabled at the time of examination.
If it is found that the activity is closed, they will do a panchnama with 2 panchs and take a picture of the activity.
It will need to be attached to the inspection report. The report of the visit was received from the parent institution.
The information and documents obtained will be verified by the Evaluation Committee. at any level.
The government has the power to verify the veracity of the facts and assessments stated by asking for information or otherwise.
The Evaluation Committee will then submit a detailed report (marking) with details and appropriate
Constituted under the Chairmanship of Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, Maharashtra State, Pune with feedback and recommendations.
The following shall be forwarded to the Scrutiny Committee by 30th November of the corresponding financial year.
In addition to the above-mentioned assessment checks, the activities of persons with disabilities which are currently
The District Social Welfare Officer or the Divyang Welfare Officer concerned of the activities for which the grant is received.
Regular inspection as per above procedure by other concerned officers directed by the Department October
to be done in a month. Also the report of the inspection, along with the photographs of the Department of Disability Welfare and the Commissionerate.
Upload it on the website and send the copy to the Commissioner, Divyang Welfare. Commissioner, Divyang Welfare
They should submit a consolidated inspection report of all schools / workshops to the government by January 15.
6 out of 14 pages
# Page 7
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
Scrutiny Committee
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 1) | Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, Maharashtra State, Pune                                                                                        | The President's      |
| 2) | Deputy Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, Maharashtra State, Pune                                                                                 | the Member-Secretary |
| 3) | Assistant Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, State of Maharashtra, Pune or other concerned officer directed by the Department of Divyang Welfare. | The member's         |
| 4) | Inspector (Related Categories) Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, Maharashtra State, Pune                                                         | The member's         |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Chairman of the Screening Committee and the Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, State of Maharashtra are at his / her discretion.
Regional Deputy Commissioner, Social Welfare Department to participate in the proceedings of the said Screening Committee.
(the concerned Department) or other relevant authorities directed by the Department of Disability Welfare as well as the requirements
District Social Welfare Officer / Assistant Commissioner or Divyang Welfare of the concerned district, if applicable.
Other relevant officers directed by the department may be called as invited members.
Responsibilities of the Scrutiny Committee: -
The total number of applications received for evaluation by the Scrutiny Committee, as on the date of certificate of registration
The screening committee should then evaluate according to the self-assessment pattern. It is then related to
For grant-in-aid from the non-grant-in-aid principle to the disabled activities, the initiative
Submit the report of eligible activities to the government with self-explanatory feedback, taking into account due diligence and other factors.
Do it.
The applications examined by the Scrutiny Committee, along with their feedback, are prepared in accordance with the prescribed procedure.
The date of the corresponding financial year with the list. It will be submitted to the government by January 15. And then the following:
The report will be examined by a state-level inquiry committee.
the State Level Screening Committee
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 1) | Joint / Deputy Secretary, Department of Disability Welfare, Mantralaya, Maharashtra State, Mumbai. | The President's      |
| 2) | Deputy Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, Maharashtra State, Pune                                      | The member's         |
| 3) | Under Secretary, (D.C. 1) Department of Disability Welfare, Mantralaya, Maharashtra State, Mumbai. | the Member-Secretary |
| 4) | Cell Officer, (DC1) Department of Disability Welfare, Mantralaya, Maharashtra State, Mumbai.       | The member's         |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Responsibilities of the State Level Screening Committee: -
Government to get approval on grant-in-aid principle from non-grant-in-aid principle by the Scrutiny Committee.
Certificate of Registration from the State Level Screening Committee pursuant to the report submitted
Renovation, sustainability of disabled activities, rating and evaluation, reservation in hiring of staff
Whether the policy has been followed or how, the student / beneficiary's Aadhaar has been linked online
Biomeric attendance, as well as their scheduling reports and staff set approval at certain locations.
Activities of Persons with Disabilities in operation, regional balance, geographical location, number of entrants available,
The backlog declared by the government, the facilities provided to the differently abled by the institution concerned,
Resources made available to persons with disabilities as per the required criteria and sanctioned by the Government.
The plan, if transferred / migrated, of the disabled initiative will be examined.
Thereafter, the Committee recommended activities for eligible persons with disabilities on the 15th day of the respective financial year.
It will be submitted to the government by February.
7 out of 14 pages
# Page 8
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
7. Declaration of activities of persons with disabilities eligible / ineligible for grants: -
a) List of activities of persons with disabilities which are eligible for grant-in-aid as per assessment after approval of the Government.
The Department of Disability Welfare will declare the month by the end of February and eligible / eligible after the announcement of the list.
Commissioner for Disability Welfare, Maharashtra within 15 days in respect of activities of ineligible persons with disabilities.
The decision will be communicated to the respective Divyangjan initiatives through the state, Pune. Those with disabilities
The activities were not made eligible for the grant, they were made eligible for the grant in the next financial year.
A new application will be required.
b) The activities of persons with disabilities who are eligible for the grant are detailed in paragraph-15 of this Government Decision.
Action will be taken regarding grant-in-aid as done.
a) Disabled activities on non-subsidized basis once eligible for grant, grant sanctioned
was made, but then fell into the "B" category in three consecutive years of inspection reports.
The inspection report on this activity includes the action taken on activities falling under category "C."
Action will be taken.
d) The activities of persons with disabilities falling under category "C" in the inspection report are as follows by the Government:
Action will be taken.
1) withholding, in whole or in part, non-payment subsidies other than nutrition subsidies; or
2) Punitive action from a minimum of ₹3 lakh to a maximum of ₹10 lakh (per annum); or
3) Cancellation of recognition
For the purposes of the said clause (2), the Secretary to the Institute and the District Social Welfare Officer, Zila Parishad shall
In a joint account of Rs. It is mandatory to have a deposit of up to ₹5 lakh in a nationalised bank.
It will be.
e) Disabled persons whose activity certificate of registration has been cancelled, or not renewed within the prescribed time
cancelled and whose registration is against the order of cancellation of the certificates, within the prescribed period and
Disability activities where appeals to the prescribed authority are not pending and are, therefore, closed.
The grant approval will be permanently cancelled.
Institutions that have approached the government for grant-in-aid approval before the implementation of the 8.सदर policy
The demand for disabled activities is being addressed under this policy as the demand is registered.
After the implementation of the said policy, the grant-in-aid principle is approved by the respective activities.
It will be mandatory to register a new request to receive it. However, this policy is relevant before it goes into effect.
Regarding grant-in-aid for disabled activities, Shri. If there is any order of the court, this Government
Appropriate decision on the matter with the approval of the competent authority and the Finance Department in accordance with the provisions of the judgment.
will be taken. Similarly, prior to the implementation of this policy, Shri. Chief Minister or M. Minister (Disability Welfare)
With their approval, the activities of persons with disabilities which have been approved on grant-in-aid as a special case,
Even in such cases, with the approval of the competent authority and the Department of Finance in accordance with the provisions of this Government Decision.
Appropriate decisions will be made.
9. Subsidy is a prerogative of the Government: -
1) As per the prescribed norms of Disability activities operating on a perpetual no / no subsidy basis in the State.
Unsubsidised activities in category "A" will be sanctioned on grant-in-aid basis after scrutiny.
8 out of 14 pages
# Page 9
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
(ii) the salary expected for the activities of such grant-worthy persons with disabilities in the relevant financial year /
To make budgetary provision for non-salary grants in the next year of the relevant financial year.
It will come.
3) Independent Government at the time of grant-in-aid to persons with disabilities after finalization of the list of activities eligible for grant-in-aid.
The decision will be made. The said grant shall not be applied retrospectively / retrospectively.
4) Salary and non-salary and other grants to activities of persons with disabilities eligible for the grant, dated 18th July, 2018 and
Provisions in the School Code dated 5th February, 2019 and as may be made from time to time thereafter.
The amendments will be approved accordingly.
10.एख If the disabled activity is ineligible for assessment for five consecutive years, the proposal for that year
The order of operation of the respective disabled activity will automatically terminate and the activity will be followed by 3 consecutive
The initiative will be considered for grant-in-aid in the next period only after the year qualifies for the assessment.
It will come.
As per the policy, only once a year i.e. from October to February of the respective financial year.
It will be mandatory to go through the grant approval process in a month. However, the grant was approved by the government.
It may direct that the procedure should not be carried out for any one or more financial years.
12. Permission of Salary / Non-Salary Funds in case of closure of Divyangjan activities: - Students / Beneficiaries
Aided disabled activities due to lack of adequate numbers or lack of adequate facilities or other reasons.
Such activities are closed if they have been closed or have been closed due to cancellation of the certificate of registration.
Salary / non-salary funds / grants during the period will not be admissible. As well as the activities of the disabled
In case, the Appellate Authority and the Government decide to restore the certificate of registration of these activities.
Salary / non-salary funds are admissible after the implementation of the said decision, the activities concerned.
The approval of the department will be mandatory to do so. This kind of approval is done with retrospective effect.
It won't come. Also, the venture will receive salary and non-salary subsidy during the closure period of the venture.
No.
However, if the order of the Commissioner, Disability Welfare cancelling the certificate of registration is appealed
by the authority or m. The High Court stayed the operation and therefore the activities of the persons with disabilities concerned.
In the event of default, the salary / non-salary subsidy will be admissible for the moratorium period.
13.एख If the disabled initiative continues to receive government-approved direct subsidies, and
In the meantime, if the certificate of registration of the activity has been cancelled and against
Filed with the Appellate Authority in accordance with the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 within the prescribed time frame.
Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities regarding the adjustment of approved staff in such activities, if the appeal is pending.
As per the circular dated 12th May, 2021 issued by Kalyan and to be issued from time to time in this regard.
It will be mandatory to act according to the amendments.
14. Subsidized activities to be undertaken by the student / s in accordance with the prescribed procedures and with the approval of the Finance Department.
Increased pay and non-salary in proportion to the number of students whose beneficiary increments have been approved
Subsidies will not be admissible for the first academic year and beyond the financial year of such recognition.
The respective special schools / workshops will then be eligible for the enhanced grant. such an increased number of students
In doing so, a decision will be taken with the prior approval of the Finance Department at the government level as per the criteria for grant approval.
Government approves Subsidy Principle for Disability Activities after implementation of the 15.सदर Policy
After receipt of each Divyang initiative, the Department dated 18th July, 2018 and 6th February, 2019.
9 out of 14 pages
# Page 10
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
Salary, non-salary subsidy (8% of employee's salary), building as per the Government Decision of the School Code of
75% of the amount actually paid as rent plus maintenance subsidy (dated 3rd March, 2019)
Rs.1500 / -per Divyang student for Special Schools for Persons with Disabilities, as per the Government Decision
Rs.1650 / - and copy of Government Decision dated 1st November, 2017 regarding Children's Homes for Mentally Retarded
The student will be paid a grant of Rs.2000 / - per month). as well as from time to time on this subject.
Subsidies will be paid as per the reforms to be undertaken.
16.अन Disability activities approved on a grant basis:
a) Resident as per the Government Decision, dated 18th August, 2004 and the number of students accepted
Permissible posts of teaching and non-teaching staff sanctioned for differently abled school and office
should be done.
b) Government procedure for recruitment / appointment as prescribed for teaching and non-teaching staff and
The recruitment will be mandatory only by following the reservation policy.
e) Proposal for recognition of posts in these activities. High-Level Committee of Secretaries
The proposal includes a disabled activity-wise Aadhaar link online at the time of submission of approval.
It will be mandatory to submit a report on biometric attendance.
Persons with Disabilities Resident / Non-Resident of Institutions which do not comply with the above provisions
The salaries of teachers and non-teaching staff in the activity will not be paid. Government Reservation
Payment of salaries of teachers / non-teaching staff appointed against policy or against the Act.
The responsibility for doing so shall lie entirely with the institution concerned.
17. Additional teaching and non-teaching staff in addition to the staff sanctioned by the institute in the disabled activities.
The overall responsibility for the salaries of such additional teaching and non-teaching staff, if appointed, is as follows:
It will belong to the institution concerned. The government is responsible for the salaries of such additional employees.
It won't stay.
18. Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance Government Decisions. Special for Persons with Disabilities as on 18th July, 2018
For Schools, Workshop Training Centres, Affiliated Hostels, Mentally Retarded Children's Homes, Early Diagnosis and Early Treatment Centres
Osteoarthritis as per the provision mentioned in Section 2 (8) of the Special Schools Code as applicable
Schools in the category should not be given fresh recognition / registration certificate. students in such activities.
Disability Subsidy in general schools only on the basis of the number of students remaining in the first batch.
should be distributed.
Grant-in-aid to Disability Activities to be approved on grant basis in 19.सदर as per availability of funds
will be distributed.
20. Salary Subsidy to Teachers and Non-Teaching Staff in Disabled Resident / Non-Residential Activities.
It will be credited to the bank account.
21. Every teacher and non-teaching staff of the headquarters of the Divyang Resident / Non-Residential Initiative.
It is necessary to stay in the place. Also, the Hostel Superintendent / Home Guard shall stay in the Hostel.
It's necessary. Their absence, other than on leave, should be construed as their absence. the caregiver,
Absence of helpers, keepers / watchmen other than the schedule assigned to them.
Their absence should be considered. Their salaries for this absence period should be reduced.
Page 10 of 14
# Page 11
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
22. Aadhar Linked-Online Biomarkers for the Institute's Aided Differently Abled Resident / Non-Residential Initiatives
The system / machine of the attendance system is being provided and after it is operationalized, he said.
Attendance of student teachers and non-teaching staff is mandatory on the system. the Sadar System /
The institution where the machines have not been supplied to the Divyang Residential Undertakings is competent to deal with the matter.
Immediately bring the said system / machines to the notice of the authority / resident with disability.
should be made operational in non-resident activities. The above mechanism is applicable to Divyang Resident / Non-Resident activities.
/ The machine has been supplied, but if it is currently defective, the system / machine is immediately provided by the concerned.
It should be fixed and implemented. Also related to the cost of the above system / machine maintenance repair.
The institution should do so from the non-payment subsidy received by them towards their Divyang Residential / Non-Residential School or Workplace.
Or the organization must pay for itself, however, through the Aadhaar-enabled-online biometric attendance system.
Disabled Residential / Non-Residential School or Workshop of the concerned institution without attendance report.
No subsidy will be given.
All the students, teachers and non-teaching staff of the aided Non-Residential Schools / Workshops.
Attend your school at 10.00 in the morning and students through the biomeric system above.
Recordings after discharge and by teaching and non-teaching staff after their regular office hours.
It's necessary. Enable each month's attendance without having to register for attendance on the system.
The officer shall be the Commissioner, Divyang Welfare, Assistant Commissioner, Social Welfare, Regional Deputy Commissioner,
social welfare, or social service without receipt from the District Social Welfare Officer or the Government.
Salaries paid through the system will not be paid. Teachers and non-teaching staff
Aadhaar seeded - Online biometric system presence will be received by the competent authority or the government.
No. Payment of salary subsidy to the teachers and non-teaching staff concerned for the period up to that date.
The entire responsibility will be of the institution concerned. The government is not responsible for this.
24. For every student in a Divyang aided residential school, as well as for residential schools and workshops.
The required relevant staff will also be Aadhaar-enabled on the online biomeric system.
Attendance must be recorded at 10.00 in the morning and at 9: 00 p.m. recorded on this system.
Attendance will be checked by the competent authority and the government every month and students will be assessed accordingly.
Nutritional subsidies will be distributed. If the student's attendance is not received by this system, the student's
Nutritional subsidies will not be provided by the government. Attendance of all students is Aadhaar-enabled - Online
The biomeric system will not be received by the competent authority or the government. The period of time until then
The institution concerned shall be solely responsible for providing the nutrition grant to the students.
25. The number of students with disabilities attending the school / workshop of the institution (July,
August, September) by average of attendance for three months (Aadhaar linked-online biomerics)
On Attendance System) posts of teachers and non-teaching staff will be sanctioned. In accordance with the
Action should be taken for payment of maintenance subsidy, salary and non-salary subsidy and building rent.
26. All physical / academic activities required by the institution for residential / non-residential activities with disabilities.
Facilities will need to be provided. An institution which does not provide such physical and educational facilities.
Non-salaried grants and building rent will not be admissible to the Divyang Resident / Non-Resident activities of the Institute.
The government will not be responsible for the expenses incurred by the institution concerned.
27. Activities on Disability Type for Resident / Non-Resident with Disabilities initiative of the concerned institution.
Permission / Approval / License granted to operate, any of those types of disability
The student (even if he / she is hyperactive / HIV-infected) will not be denied admission. The above-mentioned
11 out of 14 pages
# Page 12
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
On such Divyang Resident / Non-Resident activities, if noticed by the competent authority or the Government.
Immediate action will be taken and such a Divyang Resident / Non-Resident initiative will be derecognised.
28.अन Residential / Non-Residential Activities for Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) of Deemed to be Institutions (Deemed-to-be-Individuals)
Proper food arrangements will be required. Also, the cleanliness of such students, their room.
Cleaning, providing clean uniforms and clothing, timely cutting of nails and hair, no sexual abuse
Take very careful care of this, take special care of the girls who have come of age, do not cook on the stove,
Providing hot water for bathing, clean and safe drinking water for students, sports and
Providing recreational materials, desks, benches for activity seating, sleeping, and
Adequate and proper provision of bedding, provision of winter blankets, their health care.
It is necessary to provide them with facilities such as periodic check-ups and taking care of their health.
Non-payment subsidy and building rent for those who do not implement the disabled activities.
No payment will be made and action will be taken to derecognise such Divyang activities, if required.
will be done.
29.अन Education of students with disabilities through residential / non-residential activities of aided institutions
Quality needs to be improved. It is noted that the educational quality of the above-mentioned differently-abled students is poor.
If found, strict action will be taken against the disabled activities of such an institution.
30.अन Resident with Disabilities / Non-Residential Enterprises of any institution recognized on the principle of grant
No new appointments can be made. Firstly, teachers and non-teachers who have been selected as extras from the disabled activities.
The staff will be adjusted. When approval is given to fill up a new post in the respective Divyang initiative
be paid by the competent authority at that time in the adjacent district, division and thereafter in the State.
The first thing to be done is to make sure that there are no teachers and non-teaching staff available. After verifying
In case of non-availability of additional teaching and non-teaching staff, the school with disabilities of the institution concerned or
A no-objection certificate should be provided for recruitment at the workplace. Then more of the district, division, and state.
The competent authority should allow the filling up of posts only by advertisement in the newspaper in which the advertisement is published. However,
Additional teaching and non-teaching staff from Divyang schools / workshops, when available, to the institution concerned.
Concerned if it is noticed that permission has been granted to fill up teaching and non-teaching staff.
Strict action will be taken against the officer.
31.अस Students with disabilities who are attending a disabled school / workshop without any support
Unable to do so, students with osteoarthritis should be admitted to a school of the osteoarthritis category. osteoarthritis
Students in the category who can walk with any support in the general school
Admission should be compulsory. by admitting a student of such orthopedic category in a general school.
It should be provided with all the things required by the rules and availed of all the necessary concessions.
should be given. so as to bring such students from the orthopaedic community into the mainstream of social life.
The aim of the government to make them self-reliant by giving them equal opportunities like ordinary students will be successful. However,
A student who can walk without any support will not be admitted to a general school.
The officer concerned and the headmaster of the school concerned, if found admitted to the school.
Disciplinary action will be taken. As well as the salary of the orthopedic school or workshop of the respective institution.
Subsidies will be discontinued immediately.
A grant-in-aid approved in the 32.सदर and which is currently the government's disability initiative.
Specialists assigned to various disability-type activities that are receiving grants.
Teacher, Director of Special Vocational Education, Special Arts / Crafts / Painting / Music / Physical Education
Page 12 of 14
# Page 13
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
The director is entitled to educate the students belonging to the respective Divyang category or how, as well as the
Recognition of the position is only by confirming that the particular educational qualification is held or how.
should be given. A teacher / resident with disabilities who does not have such a special educational qualification.
The posts of such special teachers and special directors should not be recognised if the director comes to the notice.
Recognition of appointment of teachers and directors without special educational qualification.
Strict action will be taken against the concerned officials. As well as such ineligible special educators and
The directors' salary subsidy will not be paid by the government.
33. Subsidised activities of persons with disabilities concerned approved by examining records for the last 5 years.
The number of students and the number of students in attendance should be checked. entered in the previous year.
Check to see if the student is enrolled in the next class the following year.
Find out the reasons why. Recognition of teaching and non-teaching staff for the last 5 years.
Check to see if the same staff is currently working at the school.
Recognition of any other than recognized teaching and non-teaching staff prior to the Government
It should not be given without permission. Also, no new posts should be allowed to be filled. That's the case
Strict action will be taken against the concerned officer if the government comes to notice.
34. Number of students in such Divyang Residential / Non-Residential activities without the approval of the Government.
The number of employees should not be changed. Disability Residential Activities before grant approval
Only disabled activities that meet the government's terms / conditions should be eligible for the grant.
35. Review of activities of persons with disabilities in the State and persons with various disabilities.
Considering the number of persons with disabilities, a comprehensive roadmap of disabled activities for the state is ready immediately.
should be done.
If the terms and conditions prescribed for the 36.सदर Special Disability Initiative are met, and
Regular grants will be sanctioned considering the availability of funds.
37. Disability initiatives by Central Government, State Government, local bodies or other means.
If it is found that regular grants are being received, such Divyang enterprises / institutions shall be taken over by the State Government.
will be ineligible for the grant.
38. Terms and conditions prescribed by the Government from time to time for bringing the grant to principle; and
If it is found that the procedure has not been followed, the accreditation of the institution will be cancelled.
39. Schools / Workshops as prescribed by Government Decision dated 8th April, 2015.
Subject to the grant-in-principle approved by the Government on the terms and conditions of the respective schools / workshops.
The decision dates are effective from April 8, 2015. as also determined by this Government decision.
The Terms / Conditions of the Policy have been under the Department of Disability Welfare since the issue of this Government Decision.
This will be applicable to all subsidized disabled activities, including existing previously subsidized activities.
40.सदर Expenditure on funded disabled activities by the government once funds are available
will be distributed. Also, the expenses for the following year are available in the year under that head.
be subtracted from the provision.
41.सदर Government Decision No. Cabinet meeting held on 5th July, 2024
Is being issued as per approval.
Page 13 of 14
# Page 14
Government Decision No: EDD-2022 / Q. No.65 / DC1
The Government decision is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.
# Page 15
# Page 16
# Page 17
# Page 18
# Page 19
# Page 20
# Page 21
# Page 22
# Page 23
# Page 24
# Page 25
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35