# Page 1
Regarding the bank accounts of the Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) under the Department of Soil and Water Conservation and the payment of unaccounted funds to the Government accounts.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Soil and Water Conservation,
Government Circular No. : Narrow- 2018/ S. No.75/ Water- 11
Madam Kam Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Ministry, Mumbai- 400 032.
Date is July 6, 2018.
circular
It has been observed that the Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) under the Department of Soil and Water Conservation have diverted the funds disbursed for various Central and State sponsored schemes from the treasury and deposited the same in the bank accounts.
In this regard, the Finance Department has repeatedly issued instructions to review the balance of funds in the bank accounts under the Department of Soil and Water Conservation and submit the information. Also, many banks have been opened by the Drawing and Disbursing Officers without taking prior permission from the government. The Finance Department has also stated that there are financial irregularities such that after the funds are withdrawn from the treasury and kept in this bank account, the funds are spent for various purposes and the unused funds are allowed to remain in the said bank account at the end of the financial year in an unauthorized manner.
In this regard, it is informed that in all the schemes of the Department of Soil and Water Conservation, including Jalyukt Shivar, any Drawing and Disbursing Officer should immediately close the bank account opened in his own name and make all the payments through the BEAMS System of the Treasury and the CMP System. In exceptional circumstances, AC bills will be allowed by a government decision at the government level. Also, the government should immediately deposit all the unspent funds of the previous year under the Soil and Water Conservation Department.
4. Payment of unspent funds to the Government. The procedures mentioned in the circular of the Finance Department dated 24th March, 2015 and 14th May, 2015 should be followed.
The scheme-wise details should be submitted to the government by taking action as above and the unutilized amount should be deposited in the treasury immediately.