# Page 1
Sunil Pt. Kshirsagar, Sub-Divisional Officer, on deputation to the post of Assistant Regional Water Conservation Officer, Nashik.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Soil and Water Conservation
Government Order No: Establishment-2022/ PR No. 122 (Part-5)/ Water-2
Ministry, Mumbai 400032,
Date of release: June 30, 2022
Government order:
Sunil, Shri. The services of Kshirsagar, Sub Divisional Officer have been provided by the Water Resources Department on deputation to this department.
Therefore, now Mr. Sunil Pt. Kshirsagar, Sub-Divisional Officer, is being posted on deputation as Assistant Regional Water Conservation Officer, Nashik.
Mr. Sunil Pt. Kshirsagar's appointment is on a temporary basis and will be terminated with immediate effect after the posts in this cadre are filled up by promotion/ direct recruitment.
4) The order will come into effect immediately.
The Government Order has been made available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharshtra.gov.in and its code is 202206301924230926. This order is being issued by digital signature.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.
AMBADAS SAHEBRAO
CHANDANSHIVE
(A.S. Chandanshive) Under Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, 1. Accountant General 1⁄ 2 (Audit/ Accounts Permitting), Maharashtra State, Mumbai/ Nagpur 2. Secretary, Soil and Water Conservation Department, Mumbai 3. Secretary, Water Resources Department, Mumbai 4. Commissioner, Soil and Water Conservation, Aurangabad 5. Additional Commissioner, Water Conservation, Soil and Water Conservation Regional Area, Nagpur/ Aurangabad/ Pune 6. Regional Water Conservation Officer, Soil and Water Conservation Department, Nashik 7. District Water Conservation Officer, Soil and Water Conservation Department, Nashik 8. District Treasury Officer, Nashik 9. Sunil Pandit Kshirsagar, Sub-Divisional Officer and Assistant Regional Water Conservation Officer, Nashik (through WhatsApp/ website)
All functions, Department of Soil and Water Conservation, Ministry of Water Resources, Mumbai 11. Selections Nasti (Water-II) Collect