# Page 1
Mr. Ramdas. Sub-Divisional Officer to be posted as Sub-Divisional Water Conservation Officer, Soil and Water Conservation, Sub-Division Satana.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Soil and Water Conservation
Government Order No: Establishment-2022/ PR No. 122 (Part-4)/ Water-2
Ministry, Mumbai 400032,
Date of release: June 30, 2022
GOVERNMENT ORDER: Mr. Ramdas Su. The services of Pawar, Sub Divisional Officer have been provided by the Water Resources Department on deputation to this department.
Therefore, Shri Ramdas Su. Pawar, Sub-Divisional Officer, is being posted on deputation to the post of Mrid and Water Conservation, Sub-Division Satana, G. Nashik.
3. Shri Ramdas Su. Pawar's deputation is on a temporary basis and will be terminated with immediate effect once the posts in this cadre in the department are filled up by promotion/ direct service.
4) The order will come into effect immediately.
The Government Order has been made available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharshtra.gov.in with code 202206301924397726. This order is being issued by digital signature.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.
AMBADAS SAHEBRAO
CHANDANSHIVE
(Ans.) Under Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, 1. Accountant General 1⁄ 2 (Audit/ Accounts), Maharashtra State, Mumbai/ Nagpur 2. Secretary, Soil and Water Conservation Department, Mumbai 3. Secretary, Water Resources Department, Mumbai 4. Commissioner, Soil and Water Conservation, Aurangabad 5. Additional Commissioner, Water Conservation, Soil and Water Conservation Regional Area, Nagpur/ Aurangabad/ Pune 6. Regional Water Conservation Officer, Soil and Water Conservation Department, Nashik 7. District Water Conservation Officer, Soil and Water Conservation Department, Nashik 8. District Treasury Officer, Nashik 9. Ramdas Su. Pawar, Sub-Divisional Officer, Soil and Water Conservation Sub-Division, Satana, G. Nashik (through WhatsApp/ Website)
All functions, Department of Soil and Water Conservation, Ministry of Water Resources, Mumbai 11. Selections Nasti (Water-II) Collect