# Page 1
In line with the SNA-SPARSH mechanism
the respective Ministries / Administrative Departments, Single Central
agencies, single central agency level drawdowns and
the Disbursing Officer, Sectoral Implementation Mechanism, Accounts and
Directorate of Treasuries, and State Cyber Treasuries
Roles, duties, and responsibilities of the office
To bring to the notice of the concerned.
Government of Maharashtra
the Finance Department
Government Decision No.Synchronous-2024 / Q.No.51 / Treasury No.4
Madame Cama Marg, Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk, Mantralaya Extension, Mumbai, 400 032.
Dated July 30, 2025.
Read: - (1) Office Memorandum No. File No. I- (27) PFMS / 2020, Dated- 13.07.2023 and (2) Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. 07.08.2023, (3) d. 16.01.2024, (4) d. 21.05.2024,
(5) D. 20.06.2024 and (6) d. 04. Even numbered office memos of 10.2024.
(7) Government of Maharashtra, Department of Finance, Government Decision No. Narrow-2024 / P.No.54 / Treasuries - 4D. 11.10.2024.
(8) Office Memorandum from the Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance, Government of India File No. I - 126/2 2022 - ITD-CGA Dated-21.01.2025 and (9) D. An even-numbered office memo on 30.05.2025.
(10) Office Memorandum from the Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance, Government of India File No. I-126 / 3 / 2022 - ITD-CGA / 366 Dt. 11.02.2025 and (11) d. Office memorandum in the serial 25.03.2025.
(12) Government of Maharashtra, Department of Finance, Government Decision No. Narrow-2024 / P.No.54 / Treasuries - 4D. 23.04.2025.
(13) Office Memorandum from the Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance, Government of India File No. I-126 / 2 / 24 - ITD-CGA Dated - 15.05.2025
(14) The Office Memorandum No. File No.
1 (27) / PFMS / 2020 Dated - 10.06.2025.
(15) Letter from the Director, Accounts and Treasuries, State of Maharashtra No: Sanleko-2024 / Amendments / No.52 / IT
preparedness / 2025/217 d. 09.06.2025.
The Proposal: -
a) Funds to State Governments under Rule 232 of the General Financial Rules, 2017 of the Government of India
Disbursement and allocation of funds through Public Financial Management System (PFMS).
A regulation provision has been prescribed. Accordingly, the Finance of the Government of India
Distributed by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry to State Governments for Centrally Sponsored Schemes
Page 1 of 30
# Page 2
To effectively regulate the availability and utilization of funds in respect of funds. July 1, 2021
Since then, the single central agency model (SNA model) has been implemented.
b) After disbursement of funds by the Central Government in the Single Central Agency (SNA) mode, the default
It is a single central pool, drawing proportionately the share of the central and state governments from the combined funds of the state.
Deposits are made to the agency's (SNA) bank account. Actual implementation plan of the scheme
As per the draft and the operational guidelines of the scheme, a single central agency shall be constituted.
Subordinate "field operations" mechanisms (IAs) are in place. Scrutiny of beneficiaries in accordance with the permissibility of the contributions,
the whole of the business relating to selection, approval, approval orders, and actual delivery; as well as the individual
to the relevant courts (suppliers, contractors, institutions, etc.) for permissible purposes other than benefits.
the entire prescribed procedure to be followed in relation to the payments made; all proceedings in respect thereof shall prevail.
Implementation under rules, regulations and guidelines and by following the prescribed procedure.
done by the system. Operation-Sufficiency-Control and Control of Operating Systems
It is carried out by a 'single central agency' and / or the relevant competent authority.
e) Funds received in the bank account of a single central agency, in the 'single central agency' mode.
After that, the operating system is free from that fund through a parent-child account structure.
You can spend them within the prescribed limits. from bank accounts of a single central bank
(Parent Account - Through Parent Account Structure) Public Financials of the Government of India in the ownership of the operating system
Provides allowable amounts to the respective eligible courts using the Management System (PFMS).
e) Now more in cash management with respect to implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes by the Government of India
To achieve effectiveness and ensure timely disbursement of funds (i.e.
The funds are disbursed through the accounts of the Government of India and the State Governments only when there is an actual need for the same.
So, for the purpose of disbursement to the concerned court, SNA-SPARSH is an alternative fund.
Start the flow process. 13.07.2023 is done by a daily reminder. SNA-touch mechanism
Public Financial Management System (PFMS) of the Government of India, Integrated Financial Management System of the State Government
Management and Information Systems (SIFMIS) and the Reserve Bank of India's e-Kuber system.
Works through an integrated design.
e) First prevailing rules-regulations-guidelines for operating systems under SNA-Touch methodology
subject to and in accordance with the prescribed procedure; personal benefits and other allowable
by determining on the basis of merit and admissibility of the provisions relating to the purposes; that is, the electronic invoice.
To the Single Centralized Reaction Drawing and Disbursing Officer (SNA-DDO) in the form of (e-claims)
have to be sent. Thereafter, all such as the Drawing and Distributing Officer of a single central agency.
Combine the electronic invoices, along with the payment files, with the corresponding prescribed minimums.
Page 2 of 30
# Page 3
Payments are submitted to the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury office. Thereafter, the amount of the central account was received.
In order to make such payments, the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office will make the payment ledger public.
The financial system passes on the system to the relevant ministries. Provided after confirmation of receipt of central share
To account for the deposits and expenses involved by providing through e-Kuber to the creditors included in the account.
and the process of submission of accounts to the Office of the Accountant General Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury
It is done by the office.
f) The nature of the benefit to the Government of India in the SNA-touch mechanism rather than the SNA mechanism in this manner,
amount of benefit, beneficiary selection process, scheme implementation, subsidy allocation process, cost approval process,
No changes have been made in the rules, duties, rights, and responsibilities relating to etc. However,
The process of delivery by the Government of India under the SNA-Touch mechanism, however, involves a fundamental
has been changed.
a) In the form of a delivery process under the SNA-touch mechanism compared to the SNA mechanism
Against the backdrop of radical and fundamental change and the newly incorporated computer system
With regard to operations, implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes under SNA-Touch methodology.
Accordingly, the respective Ministries / Administrative Divisions, Single Central Agencies (SNAs), Single Central
Drawing and Disbursing Officers of Agencies (SNA DDOs) Operating Systems (IAs), Accounts and Treasuries
General Roles, Functions, Duties and Responsibilities of the Directorate, and the State Cyber Treasury Office
It was under the consideration of the government to bring the responsibilities to the notice of all concerned. In accordance with the
The government is taking the following decisions.
The Government's Decisions:
1.एसएनए-स Allowable to eligible courts in pursuance of implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes through Annual Procedure
In pursuance of various ancillary procedures relating to payment of amounts, the Government of India
Regulation of procedure prescribed and guidelines issued
In line with strict compliance, the respective Ministries / Administrative Divisions, Single Central Agencies, Single
Central Agency Level Drawing and Disbursing Officers, Sector Operational Mechanism, Accounts and Treasuries
General Roles, Functions, Duties of Directorate, and Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office
And the responsibilities will be as follows.
2.एसएनए-स General Roles, Functions, Duties of the Administrative Departments of the Ministry with respect to the Annual Programme
and responsibilities.
Declare / appoint a Single Central Agency (SNA) and a State Planning Manager (SSM).
Page 3 of 30
# Page 4
2.1.1) Serial Number in Paragraph 3 of the Official Memorandum dated 13.07.2023 of the Government of India
(ii) each centre for the purpose of SNA-touch procedure as per the instructions given under
The State Government is the single central agency for each State Affiliated Scheme related to the Sponsored Scheme.
[Single Nodal Agency (SNA)] is required to be appointed. The existing single central agency
SNA-touching of single central agencies existing under the SNA model.
A single central agency may also be designated / declared for procedural purposes.
2.1.2) In this regard, a single central, first approved at the competent level by the Ministries / Administrative Departments.
regarding the appointment of the agency or under the existing single central agency procedure.
Only the single central agency that exists is used for the purpose of the SNA-touch mechanism.
also self-explanatory and perfectly formal about retaining as a single central agency.
Orders should be issued.
2.1.3) Similarly, the Minimum Deputy Secretary at the administrative division level of the Ministry in accordance with the prevailing procedure.
The officer of the rank is also designated as the State Scheme Manager (SSM).
Appointment will be required. Comprehensive coordination and engagement with respect to the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
State Plan for uninterrupted and effective implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme in coordination with the stakeholders.
The manager will be responsible. Accordingly, affiliate online operations on the respective systems are prescribed.
State Plan Managers will also be responsible for timely execution.
2.2) Obtaining the State Linked Scheme Code (SLS Code) and the Public Financial Management System.
Mapping in (PFMS).
Contact the State Directorate of Public Financial Management System for the new State Affiliated Scheme
It manages public finances by obtaining the State Linked Scheme Code (SLS Code).
In the process of mapping the system with respect to the respective Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
C. Existing in the context of existing Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State Affiliated Schemes.
Codes can also be used for SNA-touching operations, in which case re-coding
No need to take it.
2.3. State Linked Scheme (SLS) -wise Drawing Account with the Reserve Bank of India
the opening.
2.3.1) Serial Number in Paragraph 3 of the Official Memorandum dated 13.07.2023 of the Government of India
(iii) Under Centrally Sponsored Schemes by the concerned Administrative Departments, as per the instructions given under
Each State Linked Schemes (SLS) wise at the Reserve Bank of India.
A separate Drawing Account needs to be opened.
Page 4 of 30
# Page 5
2.3.2) Before opening a State-Affiliated Scheme-wise Separate Withdrawal Account with the Reserve Bank of India, the respective State
Centre-State fund sharing ratio / ratio under all components of the allied scheme
It will be mandatory to ensure that the sharing ratio / pattern is uniform. If a state is affiliated with
The proportion / ratio of central-state fund sharing of different components under the scheme varies.
If so, for such entities in consultation with the relevant Ministry / Department of Government of India.
There will be a requirement to open separate withdrawal accounts with the Reserve Bank of India.
2.3.3) Finance Division for opening a separate Drawing Account with the Reserve Bank of India (corresponding Expenditure Office and
Treasurer- 4 Executive) and Accountant General (Lt. and a) - 1 Consent of the Office of Maharashtra, Mumbai
It is mandatory. For this reason, by obtaining this consent through informal reference, it is clearly mentioned.
Care should be taken to ensure that the government issues decisions. Finance Department Treasuries. Administration. - 4 Executive
By Government Circular dated 11th October, 2024 mentioned herein in Annexure No.7 of the above read
State at the Reserve Bank of India in accordance with the prescribed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
Procedure for opening of separate Annexure-wise Drawing Accounts by the Administrative Division of the Ministry.
should be done.
2.3.4) Details of the corresponding withdrawal account with the Reserve Bank of India in respect of each State Affiliated Scheme.
Records of records and records maintained in the public financial management system, India.
An e-mail message confirming the withdrawal account issued by the Reserve Bank of India has gone public.
The process of uploading to the financial management system should be expedited. as well as
The Programme Sub-Division of the concerned Ministry / Department of the Government of India for this purpose.
The Division is also made public by the respective Program Division Checker.
Coordination and follow-up to ensure prompt approval in the financial management system.
Come.
(iv) Central Share, State Share as well as Increased State Share (Top Up) and
Appropriate accounting headings and separate computations to show the general share by social category
Receiving Reference Codes (CRCs) and making budgetary allocations and fund sharing
Reporting the sharing ratio / pattern to the public financial management system.
2.4.1) The Central Government in a predetermined proportion in each Centrally Sponsored Scheme as per the Scheme Implementation Framework.
And the State Government is going to be involved in a certain share of the funds / grants of both the Governments.
Similarly, in respect of certain Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the Central share as per the pattern of the scheme concerned.
And in addition to the state share, by making available the top up grants from the state as well.
are being provided. Also, grants to be made available to General, Scheduled Castes and
A category-wise break-up is also done, such as Scheduled Tribes.
Page 5 of 30
# Page 6
2.4.2) For regular budgeting and accounting in line with Centrally Sponsored Schemes in this context.
Central share, State share and State incremental share as the case may be as well as General, Scheduled Castes
and the share for the category of Scheduled Tribes by separate Computer Reference Code (CRC) wise.
are expected to show. Thus, the implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes will be as per the framework.
All parts are indispensable and indispensable. Hence, appropriate accounting headings and separate computer reference codes
Proceedings in respect of receipt of (CRC) and making appropriate budgetary provision within the prescribed time.
It will be mandatory. Hence, the budget is in line with the implementation of centrally sponsored schemes.
Subject matters shall be dealt with strictly in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Maharashtra Budget Manual.
And it will be mandatory to complete it in the prescribed time.
2.4.3) Similarly, the Centre-State share ratio and the State incremental share in respect of each State Affiliated Scheme.
The details in this regard should also be captured in the public financial management system.
The proceedings will be required to be completed by the administrative departments of the ministry. In this regard, the system
Functions to be carried out as prescribed under the official memorandum dated 21.01.2025 of the Government of India
State by following the guidelines in the User Manual
The planning will be done by the manager. The relevant Ministries of the Government of India are also responsible for this action.
/ from the respective Designated Officer of the Programme Sub-Division of the Department
(from the checker) will also be quickly approved in the public financial management system, for
There will be coordination and follow-up.
2.5) Withdrawal for withdrawal of payments from the office of Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office, Mumbai and
Declaring the Disbursing Officer.
2.5.1 To provide for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes through SNA-Touch mechanism.
The office of Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office, Mumbai has been established. or
To act as the Drawing and Disbursing Officer for drawing payments from the Treasury Office.
As the Drawing and Disbursing Officer for the respective State Affiliated Scheme under the respective Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
Officials are going to be able to do so as may be declared by the government in certain ways.
2.5.2) the procedures prescribed by and under the rules in force by the concerned Ministryal Administrative Department in this behalf.
Accordingly, an officer of appropriate rank in a single central agency office may be appointed by a Government decision.
Officially as Drawing and Disbursing Officer at Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office
will need to be declared.
(ii) Obtaining Mother Sanction from the concerned Ministry / Department of the Government of India; and
Completion of the ancillary procedure for disbursement of budgetary provisions accordingly.
Page 6 of 30
# Page 7
2.6.1) Serial Number in Paragraph 3 of the Official Memorandum dated 13.07.2023 of the Government of India
(vii) at the beginning of the financial year in accordance with the instructions given under
Public Financial Management System for Centrally Sponsored Scheme for States by Ministries / Departments
(in PFMS) is intended to create a parent approval. This MATRI approval is for the respective Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
State-wise defines the drawing limit.
2.6.2) Ministry to obtain the requisite maternal approval from the Government of India in accordance with the Central Account.
Administrative departments in proper coordination with the concerned Ministries / Departments of the Government of India.
Necessary follow-up will be required. Central share and State share as soon as Maternal approval is received.
Also, the Government with regard to devolution of budgetary provision for (if any) enhanced State share.
By issuing a decision, it is encapsulated in the Budget Estimates Distribution and Control System (BEAMS).
The process of uploading and disbursement of grants has been expedited by the administrative departments of the Ministry.
It will have to be done.
2.6.3) Similarly, in the Budget Estimates Distribution and Control System (BEAMS), the corresponding extraction and distribution
Grants will be distributed to the officer; and, if necessary, cash flow.
Ensuring that the updating process is carried out on priority by the stakeholders;
There will be no delays or delays.
will be taken. To ensure that the proceedings are being completed expeditiously by the concerned
State Planning Managers (SSMs) at the ministerial administrative division level will be personally responsible.
Measures to be taken to ensure regular implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes and
The ancillary work to be carried out.
2.7.1) Implementation issued by the Government of India in respect of the concerned Centrally Sponsored Scheme
Strict adherence to the Operational Guidelines and the procedures prescribed.
Compliance will be carried out by a single central agency and operational mechanism; and planning
There shall be no irregularity or deviation in execution; breach of financial discipline.
shall not be; and the principles of fiscal propriety shall be strictly observed;
Vigilance to prescribe checks and balances and supervisory arrangements.
The respective ministries will take over the administrative divisions.
2.7.2) Matras to be issued by the Government of India from time to time in pursuance of disbursement of Subsidies.
An order / letter giving administrative approval of Mother Sanction.
All the terms and conditions imposed by the office memorandum, etc., and all the units of directions
Strict compliance will be ensured by the central agencies and the operational machinery.
Page 7 of 30
# Page 8
Appropriate checks and balances and supervisory arrangements are prescribed.
The administrative departments of the respective ministries will take care of the work.
2.7.3) to the existing rules in accordance with the provisions made for the implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
All the intended citation records in an accurate and up-to-date format from all concerned.
shall be maintained in a regular manner and maintained / preserved in good condition for the prescribed period.
Administrative oversight, internal audits, statutory audits, etc., shall be carried out.
It should be ensured that it is dealt with seriously and sensitively by all stakeholders.
Similarly, the prevailing rules, regulations, guidelines, and prescribed procedures are followed by all.
It should also be ensured that it is done strictly by the concerned.
2.7.4) Single Central Agency (SNA) of Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State Affiliated Schemes under it.
Government of India after successful transition from operational to SNA-touch operational
Sub-paragraph No. under paragraph No. 3 of the Office Notice dated 13.07.2023
(v) a single central bank of the predecessor in accordance with the provision prescribed under
Spending of any kind from the account is not allowed. All such single central banks
The entire unaccounted funds and accumulated interest, as the case may be, remaining in the account are with the Government of India.
It is mandatory to pay into the Consolidated Fund and the Consolidated Fund of the State Government. and then single-handedly
It is mandatory to close the central agency's bank account immediately. Thus, a single central agency
It should also be ensured that appropriate compliance actions are taken by them in a timely manner.
3. SNA - General rules, duties of a single central agency (SNA) with respect to tactile operation
and responsibilities.
(i) Registration of operating systems in the public financial management system.
3.1.1) India as required by and in relation to the implementation framework of the relevant Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
Appropriate operational mechanisms in accordance with the operational guidelines prescribed by the Government.
To register with the public financial management system and to have a specific
Mapping action should be taken with the State Affiliated Scheme. As well as
Cancellation of registration and withdrawal from the State Affiliated Scheme, if the need arises out of the circumstances.
Unmapping should also be done.
3.1.2) Pre-registered operations for the purpose of Single Central Agency (SNA) operations
SNA of the systems - for the purpose of tactile operation, again in the public financial management system
There will be no need to register and affiliate. However, the new operating system
Page 8 of 30
# Page 9
To take action if incorporated or if a new State Affiliated Scheme is incorporated.
It will be necessary.
3.1.3) The date of the office of the Controller General of Accounts, Government of India, to carry out this procedure.
Standard Operating Procedures issued under the Office Memorandum dated 25.03.2025
Procedures and / or issues to be issued by the Government of India from time to time in this regard.
Action should be taken as per the updated guidelines.
To carry out ancillary functions with respect to Maharashtra Single Central Agency System (MahaSNAP).
3.2.1) 'Single Central Agency' level Drawing and Disbursing Officers and Field Operations Mechanism.
To enable further work on Maharashtra Single Central Agency System (MahaSNAP).
Login, User ID, Initial for all concerned users in coordination with the Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries
A password must be provided. The necessary support from the public financial management system
By making Master Data available in Maharashtra Single Central Agency System (MahaSNAP)
should be taken.
3.2.2) Similarly required for operation on Maharashtra Single Central Agency System (MahaSNAP).
Complete the entire process required to make the e-signature available to all concerned
will be done.
3.2.3) Accounting for smooth execution of the transfer process under the SNA-touch mechanism and
To provide necessary training to all concerned users in coordination with the Directorate of Treasuries.
It will come.
3.2.4) Scheme Operational Guidelines as prescribed by the Government of India
Guidelines, User Manuals, and Standard Operating Procedures
(Standard Operating Procedure), as well as office notices issued from time to time,
Also, the guidelines to be issued by the State Government to the field functionaries shall be as follows:
Awareness will be taken at that time.
(iii) Determination of the hierarchy of subordinate operating systems, if required.
3.3.1) India as required by and in relation to the implementation framework of the relevant Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
In accordance with the operational guidelines prescribed by the Government, the Administrative Department of the Ministry
The hierarchy of subordinate operating systems will be determined by recognition.
3.2.2) Lower-level operational mechanisms in the service while determining the hierarchy their electronic invoices directly.
The 'single central agency' level will be referred to the Drawing and Disbursing Officer, that is, further into the
Page 9 of 30
# Page 10
It should also be consciously ensured that there are some levels. Similarly, the single intermediate
Agency Level Drawing and Disbursing Officer Distributes Maternal Clearance to Operating Systems
It should also be consciously ensured how the process will flow while doing so.
3.3.3) In Maharashtra Single Central Agency System (MahaSNAP) also in line with hierarchy fixation.
required by the system developers in collaboration with the Directorate of Development Accounts and Treasuries.
will be taken.
3.4) Withdrawal for withdrawal of payments from the office of Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office, Mumbai and
Deployment of Distribution Officer.
3.4.1) Appropriate to the prescribed standards in the single central agency office of the administrative division of the Ministry.
The officer received the payments from the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office, Mumbai.
On the basis of the Government decision to declare him as the Drawing and Disbursing Officer, the concerned
The appropriate authorization required for the officer to become physically active is issued by the Accountant General (Lt. and
a) -1 will be received immediately from the office at Maharashtra, Mumbai. Then accounts and treasuries.
The Drawing and Disbursing Officer code will be obtained from the Directorate.
3.4.2) After receipt of the authorization letter from the Office of the Accountant General and the notation from the Directorate
Authorized officer to contact the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office online.
Must be registered as a Drawing and Distributing Officer. Also operationalize their e-signatures
The prescribed procedure will be followed.
3.4.3) With the Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries after registering with the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office
Contact the concerned officer online on the Maharashtra Single Central Agency System.
(MahaSNAP) to enable physical functioning as Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
The associated process on the system will be completed.
3.5. Distribution of Maternal Sanction to Budgetary Operations, Fund Distribution and Operating Mechanisms.
3.5.1) Receipt of Budget Estimates on Distribution and Control System (BEAMS) from the Controlling Officer concerned
Budgetary Allocation to Single Central Agency Level Drawing and Disbursing Officer
The forecasting, distribution and control will be distributed over the system. As well as the existing procedure
Other ancillary budgetary functions on budget forecasting, distribution, and control systems in accordance with
It will also be carried out from time to time.
3.5.2) as well as the Maternal Clearance received from the Government of India for Central share to the Subordinate Sector Operational Agencies.
A distribution process will be carried out. Mothers appropriated by the operating agencies
Page 10 of 30
# Page 11
of approval, progress of deployment, balance of maternal approval and necessary maternal approval for the time to come.
This will be reviewed periodically.
(iii) To ensure regular implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
3.6.1) issued by the Government of India in respect of implementation of the concerned Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
Operational guidelines and procedures prescribed,
Also, the guidelines issued by the state government were strictly followed by all concerned.
will go; and there will be no irregularity or deviation in the execution of the plan;
There shall be no breach of fiscal discipline; and the principles of fiscal propriety shall be strictly observed;
Appropriate checks and balances and appropriate supervisory arrangements are in place.
Care should be taken to be well-established.
3.6.2) Matras to be issued by the Government of India from time to time in pursuance of disbursement of Subsidies.
An order / letter giving administrative approval of Mother Sanction.
All terms and conditions and directions imposed by office memorandum, etc., shall be construed by all concerned.
Strict compliance should be ensured. Also, administrative supervision, internal
Establish appropriate efficient and effective systems and procedures for auditing, etc.
should be done.
3.6.3) The corresponding supporting records shall be maintained and maintained by all concerned in a regular manner;
Operations in matters of inspection, internal audit, statutory audit, etc. by all concerned.
It should be ensured that it is dealt with seriously and sensitively. In the same way, the plan
Rules, regulations, guidelines and prescriptions in force at various stages of implementation.
It should also be ensured that the procedure is strictly followed by all concerned.
3.7) The unaccounted funds and the accumulated interest in the SNA Bank account are the combined interest of the appropriate Government.
to pay into the fund.
3.7.1) Subs. under paragraph 3 of the Official Notice dated 13.07.2023 of the Government of India
Centrally Sponsored Schemes as per the provision prescribed under paragraph (v) and
Under it, the State Affiliated Schemes have successfully transitioned from SNA to SNA-touched mode of operation.
A single central bank in any case after the transfer (onboarding)
No expenditure from the account (SNA Bank Account) will be admissible.
Page 11 of 30
# Page 12
3.7.2) SNA - Single Centre for Prior Work of Centrally Sponsored Schemes transferred to Touch Mode
The entire unaccounted funds and accrued interest remaining in the bank account of the agency, as the case may be, India
The payment should be made to the Consolidated Fund of the Government and the Consolidated Fund of the State Government.
3.7.3) as prescribed by the Government of India vide its Office Memorandum dated 16.01.2024.
The procedure should be followed. Also the date of the Government of India to work on the system
Standard Operating Procedures as prescribed under the Office Memorandum dated 30.05.2025
operating procedure) should be followed.
3.7.4) The balance in the bank account of a single central agency in respect of the State share of the unorganized fund.
Action should be taken as per the guidelines issued by the administrative department of the ministry. and then single-handedly
The central agency's bank account should be closed immediately. Consolidated funds of the appropriate government
There will be no delay in completing the process of closing the account by depositing the funds, and
Declared as a single central agency to ensure that there is no laxity at any level.
Officers will take it personally.
4. Single central agency level extraction and distribution with respect to SNA-touch mechanism.
General functions, duties, and responsibilities of an officer (SNA-DDO).
5.1) Directly on the MahaSNAP system as a single central agency level Drawing and Distribution Officer
Contact the Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries online to enable operations.
Basically, the registration of the respective state-affiliated scheme in the database of the mSnap system.
Central Code, State Code for Scheme Configuration,
Also the DDO code, Object code, Category
By recording details such as Computer Reference Codes (CRCs), etc., in line with budgetary provisions.
to be taken.
4.2) Login to the mSnap system and log in to the Public Financial Management System of the respective scheme.
Accordingly, Maternal Clearance, Centrally Sponsored Scheme Indicators, State Affiliated Scheme Indicators, Funds
Regarding the sharing ratio and the details of the respective withdrawal account with the Reserve Bank of India, etc.
information should be obtained. Also, recorded in the public financial management system.
The details of the operating systems, details of the components of the plan, etcetera are also there.
be obtained from the public financial management system. Similarly, msnap
Detailed budgeting of state-affiliated scheme-wise budgetary allocations by logging into the system
The forecast should be obtained from the distribution and control system.
Page 12 of 30
# Page 13
4.3) Similarly, the e-mail required by the Subordinate Operating Systems for operation on the MASSNAP system
The ancillary process required to make the signature available to all concerned should be completed.
Departments under which operational mechanisms are in place at more than one level, and
E-signature for administrative convenience in cases where the hierarchy is fixed
On completing the ancillary process required to execute at the nearest senior level.
The administrative department concerned can take a conscious decision. The procedure to be followed for this is a single
Central agencies should prescribe. Accounts and Treasuries on the system of facilities required for this
The system should be made available by the developers in collaboration with the directorate.
4.4) Related to the MASSNAP system in accordance with the Mother Approval Delivery Order of the 'Single Central Agency'.
In the distribution of State Linked Scheme-wise and Category-wise Maternal Clearance to the implementing agencies.
Come.
4.5. Category of electronic demands submitted by operating systems on the MASSNAP system
wise); based on which, complete electronic payment and e-payment file in the prescribed format
by creating; it is a single central agency level Drawing and Disbursing Officer with appropriate co-ordinates.
It will be submitted to the State Cyber Treasury Office online. There is no delay in
Care will be taken not to do so.
(iv) Withdrawal and disbursement of all records relating to accounts to be maintained in accordance with the prevailing financial rules.
It should be maintained in an up-to-date and accurate format at both the officer and the operational level.
The records required for the audit are also preserved for a fixed period of time.
are to be done and the said records are to be made available for audit / inspection.
Similarly, coordination activities are carried out by adopting the procedure prescribed under the prevailing rules.
It is also to be carried out as per the prescribed schedule.
4.7) Payments by a single central agency level Drawing and Disbursing Officer Maharashtra State Cyber
Payment information, although to be submitted entirely online to the Treasury Office,
Payment based on payment, e-token of payment, e-advice received after transfer of payment, etc.
The record should be recorded in the form of a register.
4. 8) Assistant to the Drawing and Disbursing Officer and do it themselves in the mSnap system.
Under Annexure B to the Government Decision on Process Flow in Context of Operations
is being co-published.
Page 13 of 30
# Page 14
5. General rules, duties, and functions of the operational machinery (IAs) with respect to SNA-touch procedures.
the responsibilities.
5.1) The nature of the benefit, the amount of the benefit, by the Government of India in the SNA-touch procedure instead of the SNA procedure,
The beneficiary selection process, the implementation of the scheme, the grant-in-aid process, the cost approval process, and the physical
Provided; as well as for permissible purposes other than personal benefits to the relevant courts (suppliers,
the entire prescribed procedure to be followed in accordance with the Contributions to Contractors, Institutions, etc.); etc.
There are no changes in the rules, duties, rights, and responsibilities of the relative. However,
The process of delivery by the Government of India under the SNA-Touch mechanism, however, involves a fundamental
has been changed.
5.2) Providers that previously operated in the SNA from bank accounts of a single central agency (Parent account - Parent account)
operating system) of the Public Financial Management System (PFMS).
were paid using; those payments now operate under the SNA-touch mechanism.
Drawing and disbursement of single centralised accounts on the basis of electronic claims (e-claims)
Based on the e-bill and payment file submitted by the officer (SNA-DDO)
The courts are being directly accessed by e-Kuber from the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office. So
In the operation of operating systems, except in the form of delivery, due to the adoption of SNA-touch mechanisms
The fact is that there has been no fundamental change.
5.3) Issue No. (i) in Paragraph 2 of the Official Memorandum dated 07.08.2023 of the Government of India
As explained under; "In SNA SPARSH mode of operation, along the lines of the prevailing SNA mode of operation."
Also, India only after verification of payments / claims / sub-certificates / supporting documents.
To send payment files to Ministries / Departments of the Government "and" existing /
To the eligible beneficiaries / as per prevailing scheme guidelines and directions of Government of India only.
The operational mechanisms are going to be responsible for proposing the supply to the suppliers. " As well as
Necessary checks applicable for expenditure to be made out of the Consolidated Fund of the State, Centrally Sponsored
The state government has also been given the option to continue the follow-up with regard to expenditure for the schemes.
It is also "responsible for the performance of bills / claims / invoices / supporting documents."
It will be up to the agencies. "This was reiterated by the Government of India on 20 June 2024.
The point in paragraph 2 of the office memorandum is also made in point number (v). India
These directions of the government should be taken seriously by all concerned.
Page 14 of 30
# Page 15
5.4) Any other centrally sponsored scheme in implementation, even if the mode of implementation has changed.
There has been no change. Hence, the implementation of the plan is carried out by the implementing agencies.
Guidance Notice, "Prevailing Rules, Regulations, Guidelines," "Government Decisions," "Directions of the Department,"
Strict compliance with 'information books', etc. shall be mandatory.
5.5. Implementing agencies, rules governing scheme implementation, government decisions, departmental directions
And the expenditure should be approved by following the appropriate prescribed procedure, taking into account the objectives of the schemes.
Select the beneficiaries, suppliers / contractors and specify the amounts to be paid to them and the name of the beneficiaries.
The sanction orders shall be issued with the approval of the competent authority mentioning. In addition to the plan
The competent authority shall ensure that the costs involved in the implementation are met as per the rules.
be approved. Payments in this regard shall be made by the State Single Agency Drawing and Disbursing Officer (SNA-
DDO) to be submitted to the State Cyber Treasury Office, however, selection of suitable beneficiaries
Or the entire responsibility of approving the expenditure for permissible and appropriate purpose rests with the implementing agencies.
will remain.
(vi) Since the Implementation Mechanism (IA) is the primary and important component in the implementation of the scheme, any
Benefits are the benefits that are given to one beneficiary and to another beneficiary for the same project.
It is mandatory for the implementing agencies to ensure that the eligibility / eligibility criteria for the benefit are met.
the competent authority in respect of any expenditure to be incurred for the purposes so permitted.
Ensure that the approval is in place and that, after such approval, it will not be provided for twice.
It should be ensured.
viii) All accounting records to be maintained in accordance with the prevailing financial regulations.
They are to be preserved in an updated and accurate form. All the supporting supporting records are also
are to be preserved for a prescribed period of time and the said records are to be audited / audited.
are to be made available. Similarly, the procedure prescribed under the prevailing rules shall be followed.
The coordination work is also to be carried out as per the prescribed schedule.
5.8) Selected as all deliveries under SNA-Touch mode will be through E-Kuber.
In the case of beneficiaries or expenses incurred, the relevant court, bank account, and contributions if
Aadhaar number information if you are directly benefiting from the National Land Payments Corporation of India (NPCI)
Incorrect reporting is going to be a very important responsibility of the operating system (IA). For this
The required documentary evidence should be obtained from the beneficiary / payee without fail.
Page 15 of 30
# Page 16
5.9) In the msnap system using the assistant and main login at the operating system level
Annexure to the Government Decision on Process Flow with respect to the activities to be carried out.
It is being co-published under C.
6. General rules of the Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries (DAT) with respect to SNA-touch procedures,
Duties and Responsibilities.
Development, upgradation, management and maintenance of the MahaSNAP system; and
work of integration.
6.1.1) SNA - The whole business of providing in touch with the public finances of the Government of India.
Management System (PFMS), State Integrated Financial Management and Information System of Maharashtra
(SIFMIS), and the Reserve Bank of India's e-Kuber system (e-Kuber).
This will be done online. the State Cyber Treasury Office for
has been established.
6.1.2) Prepare electronic invoices to the operating agencies in accordance with the provisions to be made to the courts.
come; and it goes online to a single central agency level Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
Can be forwarded in a manner; to a single central agency level Drawing and Disbursing Officer
Electronic invoices are aggregated to create electronic payments that can be made online.
be submitted to the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office; the State Integrated Financial
National Informatics Centre, MahaSNAP under Management and Information Systems.
Pune has been developed and made available to users.
6.1.3) In the coming years, the evolution of the SNA-touch mechanism into the MahaSNAP system
India as required by and in relation to the implementation framework of the relevant Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
The expected facilities should be available as per the operational guidelines prescribed by the government.
To carry out the necessary development and up-gradation; management and maintenance of the system.
Accounts and Treasuries dealing with; solving user problems; etc.
will be done by the Directorate.
6.1.4) To protect sensitive data from cyber threats and attacks in line with the MASSNAP system.
Under the guidance of the National Informatics Centre, Pune, strict cyber security measures are being planned.
Necessary action will be taken by the Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries. As well as the system
The process of conducting regular cybersecurity audits also includes accounting and
Treasuries will be done by the Directorate.
Page 16 of 30
# Page 17
6.1.5) Specific Centrally Sponsored Schemes to be implemented under SNA-Touch mechanism.
In line with the relevant scheme framework, with specific authorized buy systems currently in use,
(e.g. OMAS, NREGA-SOFT, EFMS GRAM NIDHI, JJM-MIS, AWASOFT, etc.)
There is a suggestion from the Government of India to integrate the system. Action in this regard
This will be done by the Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries in collaboration with the National Informatics Centre, Pune.
The concerned Ministries / Administrative Departments, National Informatics Centre, Pune, and others are competent for this purpose.
System integration by establishing coordination and coordination with authorities.
The Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries undertook the process of expeditiously completing the work.
It will go.
6.2. Drawing and Disbursing Officer to a single Central Agency level Drawing and Disbursing Officer
Delivering DDO codes and executing them on the msnap system.
6.2.1) Adequate to the prescribed status of a single central agency office in the administrative division of the Ministry.
The officer received the payments from the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office, Mumbai.
on the basis of the Government decision to declare him as the Drawing and Disbursing Officer; and
The Accountant General (Lt. and a) -1 Awarded by the office of Maharashtra, Mumbai to the officer concerned.
Proceedings for issuing Drawing and Disbursing Officer Codes to the said officer on the basis of the authorization letter.
Accounting and Treasuries will be done by the Directorate in accordance with the prevailing procedures.
6.2.2) Similarly, withdrawal and disbursement of the said officer to the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office.
Once registered as an officer and their e-signature is activated, the officer will receive a msgip.
It is possible to start physical operations as a Drawing and Delivery Officer on the (MahaSNAP) system.
The ancillary process on the system was completed by the Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries.
It will go.
6.3. Aadhaar based payments in respect of Direct Benefit Transfer-based (DBT-based) Centrally Sponsored Schemes
Implementing appropriate arrangements to do so.
6.3.1) Extension of SNA-touch mechanism to Direct Benefit Transfer-Based (DBT-Based) Centrally Sponsored
The Government of India has decided to do it for the schemes. Accordingly, Aadhaar-based services
State Integrated Financial Management and Information System (SIFMIS) of the State Government of India
Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS) of National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) and e-Kuber of Reserve Bank of India
(e-Kuber) These systems need to be integrated.
6.3.2) Use of Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS) of National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) in this manner.
Standard for integrating the system to make Aadhaar-based payments to beneficiaries
Page 17 of 30
# Page 18
Operational Procedure Issued under the Office Memorandum dated 11.02.2024 of the Government of India
has been done.
6.3.3) Similarly, Direct Benefit Transfer under the Office Memorandum dated 15.05.2025 of the Government of India -
Creation of Aadhaar based delivery mechanism for DBT-based Centrally Sponsored Schemes
A checklist has been prescribed.
6.3.4) Direct Benefit Transfer-Based (DBT-Based) Centres under SNA-Touch mechanism in this manner.
Implementation of the system required for Aadhaar based delivery in respect of sponsored schemes.
Office of the above-mentioned date 11.02.2024 and date 15.05.2025
Accounts and Treasuries as required by the procedure prescribed under the Memorandum.
will be completed by the Directorate.
6.4) In respect of opening of a State Linked Scheme-wise Separate Withdrawal Account with the Reserve Bank of India.
the action.
In paragraph 3 of the Official Memorandum dated 13th July, 2023 of the Government of India
Centrally Sponsored by the concerned Administrative Departments as per the instructions given under serial number (iii).
State Linked Schemes (SLS) -wise Reserve Bank of India under each of the schemes.
A separate drawing account needs to be opened at the bank. For this, it is necessary to follow
Standard Operating Procedure Finance Department Treasury Administration-4 Executive Dated October 11, 2024
It is prescribed by the government circular of the day. relating to this procedure.
Scrutiny of proposals received from the Ministries / Departments and signature of the competent authorities of the Finance Department.
Accounts and Treasuries to take up the proposal and forward it to the Reserve Bank of India.
will be completed by the Directorate.
7. General Rules, Duties of State Cyber Treasury Office with respect to SNA-touch procedure.
and responsibilities.
7.1) For implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes only in the State of Maharashtra through SNA-Touch mechanism.
For the main purpose of timely disbursement of funds through the e-Kuber system of the Reserve Bank of India.
The Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office will function for the entire state jurisdiction.
7.2) Maharashtra Single Interim by the concerned Single Central Agency Level Drawing and Disbursing Officers.
Electronic based on a stand-alone computing system called the Agency System (MahaSNAP).
Accepting payments, making the following corresponding formal version of it as a treasury office; each
Every payment file pursuant to the electronic payment is first submitted to the Government of India.
Page 18 of 30
# Page 19
Consent from Public Financial Management System (PFMS); Central share from Government of India
Only after confirmation of receipt of the amount is the payment made directly to the court through the e-Kuber system of the Reserve Bank of India.
The entire ancillary work in respect of providing; etc. is done by the Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office.
will be passed.
7.3. Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office Principal Accountant General (Lt. and
(a) -1, Duty as a separate accounting sub-committee within the jurisdiction of Maharashtra, Mumbai
shall be paid in accordance with the payments passed for the purpose of implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
Accounting of transactions through proper computer system Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury
will be done by the office. Similarly, the Principal Accountant General (Lt. and a) -1, Maharashtra, Mumbai
Online submission of accurate monthly accounts to the office in the prescribed format, as per the prescribed schedule.
The Maharashtra State Cyber Treasury Office will be responsible for doing so.
7.4) Funding of Centrally Sponsored Schemes through SNA-Touch mechanism of Reserve Bank of India's E-Kuber system.
Timely disbursal to the concerned courts through the medium is mainly done by the Central Government.
The procedure will be followed as prescribed. Maharashtra as a supplementary arrangement for the same.
The state cyber treasury office will continue to function.
7.5. Process flow of proceedings with respect to the holder of the grant and unsuccessful grants.
Flow) is being co-published under Annexure D to this Government Decision. Similarly, SNA-
Reference List of Office Memoranda issued by the Government of India in the context of Tactical Procedure.
The decision is being co-published under Annexure A.
8. Government of India is mandated to implement all centrally sponsored schemes through SNA-touch mechanism only.
has been done. State if centrally sponsored schemes are transferred expeditiously to the SNA-touch mechanism.
Incentive subsidies will be provided in the fall. Also, the implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes SNA-
In case of non-touching, the State will be provided with a Central Subsidy from the Central Government.
No. This will result in a financial loss to the state, reducing funds for welfare schemes and benefiting the beneficiary.
You will also be deprived of longevity. Hence, SNA-touching of all related schemes within the prescribed time frame.
There needs to be prompt onboarding within the system. as well as transfer
After that, the implementation of the relevant plan must be free from the SNA-touch mechanism.
For this, all the relevant elements have their roles, roles, duties, and responsibilities in the SNA-touching process.
All of them are required under the above paragraphs 2 to 7 as there is a need to have a thorough knowledge of the responsibilities.
are being brought to the notice of the concerned.
Page 19 of 30
# Page 20
9. Similarly, the prerequisites to be met by all relevant entities in accordance with the SNA-touch mechanism.
Processes should be completed at a faster pace; SNA-touching of the respective Centrally Sponsored Scheme should be faster.
be transferred; the State shall be deprived of the grants-in-aid it receives from the Government of India.
should not cause financial loss to the State; and the implementation of the schemes concerned should not be affected by SNA-Touch.
to be carried out effectively in the procedure; for this, the respective Ministries / Administrative Departments, the single
Central Agencies, Single Central Agency Level Drawing and Disbursing Officers, Sector Operations
General duties of the Directorate of Systems, Accounts and Treasuries, and the State Cyber Treasury Office
And the responsibilities are brought to the notice of all concerned under the said paragraphs no. 2 to 7.
However, these duties and responsibilities are not so limited / restricted, but ultimately the government.
Strict compliance with prevailing financial rules, regulations, guidelines while carrying out business
To perform and strictly follow the prescribed procedure is to be followed by every person working in the Government machinery.
All concerned must take a serious note that the entity has a natural and inherent duty.
will remain.
The government decision is available on the Maharashtra government's www.maharashtra.gov.inय website.
# Page 21
# Page 22
# Page 23
# Page 24
# Page 25
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30