# Page 1
Regarding the nomination to the Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board,...
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Cooperation, Marketing and Textiles
Government Decision No: KripaMa-0326 / Q. 156/21 S,
Madam Cama Marg, Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai 400032.
Date: April 30, 2026.
The Maharashtra Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development and Regulation) Act, 1963.
2. Letter from the Executive Director, Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board, Pune No. Please / Administration /
Konkan / Member Appointment / 786/2026 d. 09.04.2026.
The Proposal: -
Maharashtra in Section 39 (b) of the Maharashtra Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development and Regulation) Act, 1963
On the State Agricultural Marketing Board, one from each Revenue Department from the Chairman of the State Market Committees.
There is a provision for nominating 6 members as members. Chairman of Agricultural Produce Market Committee, Sindhudurg, District Sindhudurg for the post lying vacant from Konkan Revenue Department.
Shri Tulsidas Tukaram Ravarane as a nominated member on the Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board
The matter of appointment was under the consideration of the government.
The Government's Decisions:
As per Section 39 (b) of the Maharashtra Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development and Regulation) Act, 1963, the Agricultural Produce Market Committee from the Konkan Revenue Department as a member on the Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board,
Sindhudurg, District Sindhudurg on the nomination of Mr. Tulsidas Tukaram Ravarane, Chairman, Market Committee
The appointment is being approved by the government.
Shri Tulsidas Tukaram Ravarane will be eligible to act as a member on the Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board with effect from the date of this Government decision.
3. Tenure of office of Mr. Tulsidas Tukaram Ravarane as Member, Maharashtra State Agricultural Marketing Board
He served as the Chairman of the Agricultural Produce Market Committee, Sindhudurg, District Sindhudurg.
will remain.
The Government decision is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.