# Page 1
Revision of Pay Scales, Minimum Qualifications for the appointment, Terms and Conditions of Teachers and other academic staff such as Library and equivalent cadre in Degree Level Technical Education as per AICTE Scheme (7th Pay Commission) to Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere/Institute of Chemical Technology, Government Deemed University, Matunga, Mumbai, All Government and Non Government Aided Institutes, University affiliated and Autonomous institutes conducting Professional Degree Courses such as Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy, Architecture, Hotel Management and Catering Technology etc....
GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA
Higher & Technical Education Department
Government Resolution No. सावेआ - ११११/प्र.क्र.४४/१९/तां. शि. २
Madam Kama Road, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya Annex, Mumbai - 400 032
Dated 11th September, 2019
Read 1. Government of Maharashtra, Higher and Technical Education Department, G.R.No. SPC-2010 / (34/10) / TE-2, dated 20th August 2010
2. Government of Maharashtra, Higher and Technical Education Department,
G.R.No No. CAS-2013/(32/13)/TE-2 dated 17th October 2015
3. Government of Maharashtra, Higher and Technical Education Department,
corrigendum No. CAS-2013/(32/13)/TE-2 dated 13th October 2016
4. Government of Maharashtra, Higher and Technical Education Department,
G.R. No. SePrNi-2010/(264/10)/Tanshi-2 dated 10th September 2012 and
Notification dated 10th September 2012 (Annexure- A)
5. Government of India MHRD Letter No-1-37/2016/TS II Dated 18th January,2019
6. All India Council for Technical Education Notification F. No. 61-1 / RIFD /7th CPC/2016-17, dated 1st March 2019
7. All India Council of Technical Education, letter No-F.No 61-1/RFD/7th CPC/2016-17 dated 8th March, 2019
8. Letter No. 5(1)/ASTHA/7Th Pay/FACULTY/2019/230 dated 5th July, 2019 of
Directorate of Technical Education, M.S., Mumbai
Preamble:
The 6th Pay Commission pay scales in accordance with the recommendations of All India Council for Technical Education for teachers and other academic staff in degree level technical Institutions were implemented in the State vide Government Resolution mentioned in Reference No.1, 2, 3 above and Recruitment Rules published vide Government Resolution mentioned in reference No. 4 above.
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, has communicated the decision of Government of India to All India Council for Technical Education Vide its Letter No-1 37/2016/TS II Dated 18th January, 2019, regarding revision of pay scales of Engineering and Technical Institution under preview of AICTE. After the approval received from Government of India, All India Council for Technical Education revised the pay structure of teachers and other academic staff in degree
level technical Institutions as per the 7th pay commission recommendation vide its notification mentioned in Reference No.6 above. AICTE also communicated to State Government vide its letter mentioned in Reference No. 7 to take appropriate action to implement the recommendations contained
# Page 2
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ- 1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
in the notification dated 1st march 2019 issued by AICTE.
The scheme announced by the All India Council for Technical Education is applicable to all degree level technical institutions and Universities, including deemed to be Universities imparting technical education and such other courses/programs approved by AICTE and areas as notified by AICTE from time to time.
The scheme announced by All India Council for Technical Education for the Revision of Pay Scales, Minimum Qualifications for the appointment, Career Advancement Schemes, Terms and Conditions of Teachers and other academic staff such as Library and equivalent cadre in Degree Level Technical Education as per AICTE Scheme (7th Pay Commission) to Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere, Institute of Chemical Technology, Government Deemed be University, All Government and Non-Government Aided Institutes, University affiliated and Autonomous institutes conducting Professional Degree Courses such as Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy, Architecture, Hotel Management and Catering Technology etc. was under consideration of Government.
Resolution – The question of implementing scheme of revisions of pay scales as per Notification F. No. 61-1 / RIFD/7th CPC/2016-17, dated 1st March 2019 of AICTE to all teachers and equivalent cadres working in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere, Institute of Chemical Technology, Government Deemed be University, All Government and Non-Government Aided institutes, University affiliated and Autonomous institutes conducting Professional Degree Courses was under consideration of State Government. After considering all the aspects of the scheme and approval of State Cabinet, the State Government has decided to implement and revise Pay Scales, Minimum Qualifications for the appointment, Terms and Conditions of Teachers and other academic staff are as follows: - 1.0 Applicability - 1.1 The revised pay scales together with conditions mentioned in this Government Resolution shall apply to teachers and other academic staff in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere, Institute of Chemical Technology, Government Deemed University, Matunga Mumbai, All Government and Non-Government Aided Institutes, University affiliated and Autonomous institutes conducting Professional Degree Courses such as Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy, Architecture and such other courses/programs under the preview of AICTE.
1.2 Date of Effect a) Pay Scales and DA: The revised pay-scales shall be effective from 01.01.2016.
b) Other Allowances: The rate of other allowances shall be at par with the State Government Employees.
1.3 Effective date of application of Service Conditions a) All other service conditions including Qualifications, Experience, Recruitment, Promotions, publications, training and course requirements etc. shall come into force with effect from the date of this Government Resolution.
b) The Qualifications, Experience, Recruitment and Promotions etc. during the period from 17.10.2015 to till the date of this Government Resolution shall be as per sixth pay commission and short term training programs as per the guideline issued by state government as per AICTE. As the state government didn't issue the guideline of API/PBAS, it shall be exempted.
However, the Average ACR during the reporting period shall be as per the guideline issued vide G.
R. dated 17-10-2015.
c) Those who are eligible for promotions after the date of publication of this Government Resolution shall have to meet the necessary conditions such as additional qualification, undergoing industrial training, pedago cal trai faculty induction program, publishing research papers etc. However, these requirements shall be permitted to be fulfilled till 31st July, 2022, or within 3 years from the date of this Government Resolution, whichever is later, so as to enable faculty members in equipping them for requisite mandatory requirements of this Government Resolution to avail the benefit of
Page २ of ३८
# Page 3
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
promotion retrospectively from the date of eligibility.
d) For incumbent faculty members, the date of eligibility up to 31st July, 2022 (or minimum 3 years from the date of publication of this Government Resolution, whichever is later) shall be allowed to be according to the 6th CPC Gazette notification published on 8th November, 2012. All the benefit of promotion to such candidates is permitted retrospectively on the date when he/she became eligible.
e) It may be noted that, no further extension would be given beyond 31st July, 2022 or 3 years from the date of publication of this Government Resolution, whichever is later, and those who do not meet the essential criteria despite the above grace period, shall lose an opportunity for getting promotion retrospectively. However, they will be eligible for promotion from the date they meet these criteria thereafter.
f) In cases, wherein interviews are already conducted either for direct recruitment or for promotions but candidates did not join, such candidates are to be allowed to join. Their further up-gradation will be governed by this Government Resolution.
g) In cases, where advertisement was published, applications invited but interviews have not been conducted till publication of this Government Resolution, the institutes / employers are required to publish corrigendum and processing of applications must be done in accordance with the provisions given in this Government Resolution.
2.0 General
2.1 Revised Designations and Mode of Appointments There shall be only three designations in respect of teachers in degree level technical institutions as far as cadre structure is concerned, namely Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and Professor as given below in Table 1. Also there shall be no change in the present designations in respect of Library, Physical Education and Training & Placement Personnel at various levels.
Following mode of appointment shall henceforth be used: Table 1: Cadre Structure and Mode of Appointment
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Sr. No. | Designations of Teaching Faculty | Entry pay | Level | Mode of Appointment |
| 1 | Assistant Professor | 57700 | 10 | Direct Recruitment |
| 2 | Assistant Professor (Senior Scale) | 68900 | 11 | Promotion |
| 3 | Assistant Professor (Selection Grade) | 79800 | 12 | Promotion |
| 4 | Associate Professor | 131400 | 13A1 | Promotion / Direct Recruitment |
| 5 | Professor | 144200 | 14 | Promotion / Direct Recruitment |
| 6 | Senior Professor | 182200 | 15 | Promotion |
| 7 | Principal / Director | 144200 | 14 | Direct Recruitment |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.2 New Pay Structure The new pay structure shall involve a pay matrix with an ascending series of levels and ascending cells in each level. The new pay matrix shall subsume the pay band and grade pay in one simple chart as given in Annexure - I. The pay matrix shall comprise of two dimensions- a horizontal range of levels starting from the lowest level in the hierarchy and ascending to the highest level, with the levels being numbered from 10 to 15 covering the entire gamut of Teachers and other Academic Staff. Within each level, the salary increases as one goes down vertically, with each progression of going down represented by a "Cell". Each Cell within that level represents the steps of annual financial progression of 3%. On recruitment / promotion, an employee shall join at a particular level and progress within the level as per the vertical range. The movement shall be based on annual increments till the time of his/her next promotion. When the employee will receive a promotion, he/she will progress to the next level in the horizontal range till it exhausts.
Page ३ of ३८
# Page 4
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ- 1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
2.3 Levels and Cells The method followed by the 7th CPC shall be adopted in the academic pay structure also, moving from the concept of Pay Band and Academic Grade Pay to that of Levels and Cells. The changes will appear only due to the existing difference between the two streams in terms of Academic Grade Pay vis-à-vis the corresponding Grade Pay. The levels for academic pay shall be numbered as per the corresponding non-academic level. Thus, the levels are numbered as 10, 11, 12, 13A1, 14 & 15 corresponding to the present AGP of Rs. 6000, 7000, 8000, 9000, 10000 and 12000 respectively.
2.4 Pay Matrix and Fixation of Revised Pay For Fixation of pay of an Employee in the Pay Matrix as on 1st January 2016, the existing pay (Pay in Pay Band plus Academic Grade Pay) in the pre-revised structure as on 31st December, 2015 shall be multiplied by a factor of 2.57, rounded off to the nearest Rupee, and the figure so arrived at, will be located in that level in the Pay Matrix and if such an identical figure corresponds to any cell in the applicable level of the Pay Matrix, the same shall be the pay, and if no such cell is available in the applicable level, the pay shall be fixed at the immediate next higher cell in that applicable level of the Pay Matrix. If the figure arrived at in this manner is less than the first cell in that level, then the pay shall be fixed at the first cell of that level of Pay Matrix.
If more than two stages are bunched together, one additional crement equal to 3% may be given for every two stages bunched, and pay fixed in the subsequent cell in the pay matrix.
2.5 Pay Bands with AGP and IOR (Index of Rationalization) Based on the above, the various levels of pay with its Academic Grade Pay (AGP) are as per Annexure-I.
2.6 Entry Pay The Entry Pay for Academic Pay Structures and Levels shall be as per Table 1 Mentioned in Para 2.1 2.7 Pay Fixation in case of Direct Recruitment / Promotion The pay of employees appointed by direct recruitment on or after 1st day of January 2016 shall be fixed at the minimum pay or the first cell in the level, applicable to the post to which such employee is appointed. In case of promotion, candidate would be given a notional increment in his existing Level of Pay, by moving him/her to the next higher cell at that level. The pay shown in this cell would now be located in the new level corresponding to the post to which candidate has been promoted. If a cell identical with that pay is available in the new level, that cell shall be the new pay; otherwise the next higher cell at that level shall be the new pay of the employee. If the pay arrived at in this manner is less than the first cell in the new level, then the pay shall be fixed at the first cell of that level.
2.8 Date of Increment (i) Annual increment is given in the Pay Matrix at 3%, with each cell being higher by 3% over the previous cell in the same level, rounded off to nearest 100. Annual increments to each employee would move up in the same academic level, with an employee moving from the existing cell in the academic level to the immediate next cell in the same academic level.
(ii) There shall be two dates of increment i.e. 1st January and 1st July of every year, provided that an employee shall be entitled to only one annual increment on either one of these two dates depending on the date of appointment, promotion or grant of financial up-gradation.
(iii) The increment in respect of an employee appointed or promoted during the period between the 2nd day of January and 1st day of July (both inclusive) shall be granted on 1st day of January and the increment in respect of an employee appointed or promoted during the period between the 2nd day of July and 1st day of January (both inclusive) shall be granted on 1st lay of July.
2.9 Annual Process of Promotion Every University/College/Directorate of Technical Education shall ensure that the selection process for direct recruitment for various positions is carried out annually so as to maintain Page 8 of 3
# Page 5
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
required faculty numbers and cadre ratio as per AICTE norms so that no loss is caused to students. Interviews for the promotions of the faculty members shall be carried out at a regular span annually to avoid any stagnation in career growth of faculty members.
Candidates, who do not fulfill the minimum requirement stipulated in this Government Resolution, will have to be re-assessed after a period of one year. The date of promotion shall be the date on which he/she satisfies all the minimum requirements and successfully reassessed.
The constitution of the Selection Committee as applicable to these appointments/promotions of the Assistant Professor to Associate Professor and Associate Professor to Professor or Professor to Senior Professor is enumerated in Annexure-II. Various stages of promotions/direct recruitment and mode of selection are given in Table 2.
A teacher who wishes to be considered for promotion may submit in writing in the prescribed proforma duly supported by all credentials to the Principal / Director of the College, within three months in advance of the due date, that he / she fulfills all requisite qualifications.
The entry level and consecutive stages of promotions are shown in Table 2
Table 2: Stages of Promotion/ Direct Recruitment and mode of selection
-------------------------------------------------
| Stage | Designation |
| Entry Level, Stage-I | Assistant Professor |
| Stage-II | Assistant Professor (Senior Scale) |
| Stage-III | Assistant Professor (Selection Grade) |
| Stage-IV | Associate Professor |
| Stage-V | Professor |
| Stage-VI | Senior Professor |
-------------------------------------------------
2.10 Age of Superannuation The existing provisions about superannuation and reemployment of teachers shall continue. (As per State Govt. policy evident from State Govt. GR dated 8th March 2019 about UGC pay scales) 2.11 Health Insurance Scheme Existing provisions of Health Insurance Scheme as applicable to State Government employees shall continue. (As per Present Medical reimbursement scheme and विमाछत्र योजना )
2.12 Pension, Gratuity, Family Pension, GPF, Leave Encashment and Other Pensionary Benefits All pensionary benefits including leave encashment shall be extended to faculty members and other staff such as Library, Physical Education and Training & Placement Personnel as per the revised norms recommended by the 7th CPC and implemented as per the norms of the State Government.
2.13 Industrial Training/Professional Training Since a requirement of industrial training/professional training (as the case may be) has been stipulated for vertical movement of faculty members, the AICTE, the Directorate of Technical Education, Maharashtra, State Government shall devise a suitable mechanism for facilitating all faculty members to undergo industrial training/professional training in consultation with AICTE, Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), FICCI, NASSCOM, CFTI, CSIR laboratories, IISER, CIEFL ISI, ISRO, DAE, DRDO and other such industry/professional bodies with approval of State Government.
2.14 Teaching Engagement The faculty members shall have an engagement of not less than 40 hours per week including teaching contact hours and other activities. The work of tutorial / project / research/ administration may be distributed among the faculty members as per the need and availability of staff. The laboratory engagement will also be counted towards teaching hours. The minimum teaching contact hours for various positions shall be as given in Table 3 below.
Page ५ of ३८
# Page 6
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ- 1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
Table 3: Teaching Engagement of Faculty Members in Degree Level Institutions
--------------------------------------------------
| Designation | (Teaching / Laboratory hours) / week |
| Assistant Professor | 16 |
| Associate Professor | 14 |
| Professor / Senior Professor | 14 |
| Director / Principal | 6 |
--------------------------------------------------
Relaxation of 2 hours per week in teaching contact hours shall be granted to faculty members handling additional responsibilities like HOD / Dean. Regarding work hour State Government seeks clarification from AICTE.
2.15 Consultancy (i) Consultancy work may be undertaken by members of the faculty to generate resources, either for institutions or for themselves.
(ii) Not only the faculty members should be encouraged to undertake consultancy work, but also an appropriate environment be created by the managements of institutions to facilitate faculty members to undertake such work.
(iii) Suitable parameters for sharing the generated resources between the institution Existing guidelines for sharing the revenue generated out of consultancy work between the Government, institution and individual faculty member shall continue.
(iv) The faculty members engaged in consultancy/ industry interaction / research / start-up activities / community services may be allowed some adjustment in teaching time table without compromising their teaching engagement hours.
2.16 Start-up Presently, the institutions are ranked based on academic performance and placement of students. In future, it may also be based on a number of start-ups and entrepreneurs created by the institute.
Therefore, technology incubation centers shall be established and frequent interactions between entrepreneurs / industrialists / alumni and students shall be arranged for motivating students to initiate start-up. Director, Directorate of Technical Education shall issue necessary direction with the concouracnce of State Government.
2.17 Statutory Reservation The statutory reservation policy for recruitment and promotion applicable as per state government issued time to time.
2.18 Quality Improvement Programme (QIP) / Teaching Research Fellowship (TRF) Schemes With a view to improve the quality of technical education, Directorate of Technical Education, Maharashtra State, to implement QIP/TRF schemes for all the eligible teachers working in Technical institutions.
2.19 Counting of Past Service for Direct Recruitment and Promotion Previous regular service, whether national or international, as Assistant Professor, Associate Professor or Professor or equivalent in a University, College, National Laboratories or other scientific / professional organizations such as the CSIR, ICAR, DRDO, UGC, ICSSR, ICHR, ICMR, DBT or state PSUs etc., should be counted for direct recruitment as an Assistant Professor / Associate Professor / Professor provided that: a) The qualifications for the post held are not lower than the qualifications prescribed by the AICTE for Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and Professor as the case may be.
b) The post is / was in an equivalent grade or of the pre-revised scale of pay as the post of Assistant Professor / Associate Professor / Reader and Professor.
c) The candidate for direct recruitment has applied through proper channel.
d) The concerned Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and Professor should possess the same minimum qualifications as prescribed by the AICTE for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and Professor, as the case may be.
Page ६ of ३८
# Page 7
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
The post was filled in accordance with the prescribed selection procedure as laid down in the Regulations of University / State Government / Central Government / concerned institutions, for such appointments.
f) The previous appointment was not as guest faculty for any duration or ad-hoc or in a leave vacancy of less than one year duration. Ad-hoc or temporary service of more than one year duration can be counted provided that: (i) The period of service was of more than one year.
(ii) The incumbent was appointed on the recommendation of the duly constituted Selection Committee.
(iii) The incumbent was selected for the permanent post in continuation to the ad-hoc or temporary service;
(iv) An artificial break in service shall not be used to the prejudice of employee, appointed on permanent basis. The person appointed on a permanent basis shall be given the benefit of the entire service rendered by him with effect from the date of initial appointment (temporary / contract / ad-hoc) notwithstanding the artificial break / breaks in service.
(v) The incumbent was drawing total gross emoluments not less than the monthly gross salary at the initial stage of a regularly appointed Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and Professor, as the case may be; and
(vi) At the time of selection, the negotiated terms and conditions clearly tion the period of experience, nature of experience and same has been consented by the employer.
g) No distinction should be made with reference to the nature of the management (Private /Local Body/Government) of the institution where previous services were rendered while counting past services under this clause.
2.20 Equivalence of Experience of Diploma Level Institutions and Degree Level Institutions Experience at Diploma Level Polytechnic shall be considered equivalent to experience in the degree level institutions at appropriate level, as applicable provided, scale of pay, qualifications, experience and research contribution are same for the post under consideration as per the present Government Resolution.
3.0 Cadre Structure
3.1 Minimum Cadre Ratio (i) The minimum 1:2:6 of cadre ratio be maintained for Professor: Associate Professor: Assistant Professor respectively.
(ii) Minimum number of faculty requirements for an approved institute shall be calculated on the basis of faculty: student ratio prescribed by AICTE.
(iii) Faculty: student ratio would be applicable as per the Approval Process Handbook published by AICTE from time to time.
(iv) For the purposes of this cadre ratio, Assistant Professor, Assistant Professor (Senior Scale), Assistant Professor (Selection Grade) shall be grouped together and be termed as Assistant Professors.
(v) Similarly, Professors and Senior Professors will be grouped together and be termed as Professors.
(vi) Principal / Director shall be outside the purview of cadre ratio.
3.2 Flexible Cadre Structure While promoting the incumbent, flexible cadre structure is followed as below: (i) Incumbent faculty members be upgraded to higher positions, after being eligible, through a process of promotion to be held annually, irrespective of availability of vacancy in that cadre.
(ii) The incumbent so upgraded to a higher position shall be re-designated as Assistant Professor (Senior Scale)/Assistant Professors (Selection Grade)/Associate Professor/Professor as the case may be.
Page ७ of ३८
# Page 8
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
(iii) With this cadre structure, more faculty members may become Professors/Associate Professors at some point of time as a result of which, cadre ratio as an example may become skewed such as 9:0:0 or 8:1:0 or 5:1:3 etc. but in any case it should not be 0:0:9 or 0:1:8 or 0:2:7.
(iv) The total numbers of minimum faculty positions remain the same as calculated from faculty: student ratio, though the cadre ratio is improving with these promotions.
(v) The lower post can be treated vacant once the incumbent moves on higher post through promotions or through direct selection by keeping total sanctioned posts of all cadres put together as fixed.
(vi) This vacant post will be filled by suitable eligible incumbent possessing required qualifications.
(vii) If a suitable candidate is not available, the post shall be filled by open selection.
(viii) The open selection / promotion shall be made by a committee constituted as per norms published in this Government Resolution.
(ix) The candidate shall be promoted from lower cadre to higher cadre as and when they complete eligibility criteria for the higher cadre, irrespective of availability of post in that cadre.
3.3 Inter-se seniority between the directly recruited teachers and promoted The Inter-se seniority of a directly recruited teacher shall be determined with the reference to the date of joining and for the teachers promoted with reference to the date of eligibility as indicated in the recommendatic of the selection committee of the respective candidates. The rules and regulations of the respective Central/State Government /UT Government shall apply for all the matters of seniority.
3.4 Position of Principal / Director (i) Principal/Director of AICTE approved institution has to be a full time faculty selected in accordance with the due process of selection to be adopted by the concerned university/State Government/Public Service Commission/Respective Board of Governors/Board of Management by taking into consideration the qualifications and other requirements as laid down by AICTE.
(ii) In an institution where several programmes under technical education approved by AICTE are running, the Principal / Director shall be from one of the programmes preferably from a programme with maximum student strength.
a. 4.0 Mandatory Teacher Trainings 1. Every teacher appointed / promoted to any position here onwards with effect from the publication of this Government Resolution shall have to mandatorily undergo 8 online modules of MOOCs in SWAYAM as per the AICTE teacher training policy preferably within first year of service.
2. No newly appointed faculty member shall be completing the probation without getting the certification of completion of these 8 modules. The teacher training policy document may be downloaded from AICTE website.
3. The requirement of completing these modules as mentioned in this Government Resolution is applicable to all the incumbent teachers also while applying for promotion / selection to next higher cadre only once in the career.
4. Those who are eligible for promotions after the date of publication of this Government Resolution shall have to meet the necessary conditions such as additional qualification, undergoing industrial training, pedagogical training, faculty induction program, publishing research papers etc. However, these requirements shall be permitted to be fulfilled till 31st July, 2022 or within 3 years from the date of publication of this Government Resolution, whichever is later, so as to enable faculty members in equipping them for requisite mandatory requirements mentioned in this Government Resolution to avail the benefit of promotion retrospectively from the date of eligibility.
Page ८ of ३८
# Page 9
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
5.0 Minimum Qualification for Recruitments Minimum qualification, experience, research contributions, feedback and requisite training requirements for different levels for direct recruitment and promotions for the faculty members are as follows.
5.1 Minimum Qualifications for direct recruitment as an Assistant Professor
(Level-10. Entry Pay 57700/-)
(a) Engineering / Technology B.E. / B. Tech. / B. S. and M. E. / M. Tech. / M. S. or Integrated M. Tech. in relevant branch with first class or equivalent in any one of the degrees.
(b) Management Bachelor's Degree in any discipline and Master's Degree in Business Administration/PGDM/C.A./ ICWA/M. Com. with First Class or equivalent and two years of professional experience after acquiring the degree of Master's degree.
(c) Pharmacy B. Pharm. and M. Pharm / Pharm. D. in the relevant specialization with First Class or equivalent in any one of the two degrees.
(d) MCA B. E. / B. Tech. / B. S. and M.E. / M. Tech. / M. S. or Integrated M. Tech. in relevant branch with First Class or equivalent in any one of the degrees.
OR
B. E., B. Tech. and MCA with First Class or equivalent in any one of the two degrees.
OR
Graduation of three years' duration with Mathematics as a compulsory subject and MCA with First Class or equivalent with 2 years of relevant experience after acquiring degree of MCA.
(e) Hotel Management and Catering Technology Minimum years Bachelor's Degree in HMCT and Master's Degree in HMCT or in relevant disciplines with First Class or equivalent in any one of the two degrees.
OR
Minimum 4 years Bachelor's Degree in HMCT with First Class or equivalent and minimum of 5 years of relevant experience at a managerial level not less than Assistant Manager in a 4 - star Hotel or in a similar position in the hospitality industry/ tourism industry.
(f) Architecture B. Arch. and M. Arch. or equivalent Master's degree in an allied field with First Class in any one of the two degrees, and minimum 2 years' experience in the Architecture profession.
OR
B. Arch. with First class or equivalent and minimum of 5 years' experience in the Architecture profession.
(g) Town Planning Bachelor's degree in Architecture/Planning/Civil Engineering or Master's degree in Geography / Economics/Sociology or equivalent AND Master of Planning or equivalent with First class or equivalent in either in Master of Planning or any above degrees with years of relevant experience (h) Design Bachelor's Degree or minimum 4 year Diploma in any one of the streams of Design, Fine Arts, Applied Arts and Architecture or Bachelor's degree in Engineering with First class or equivalent AND
Master's degree or equivalent Post Graduate Diploma in relevant disciplines with First Class or equivalent in a concerned / relevant /allied subject of Industrial Design / Visual Communication / Fine Arts / Applied Arts / Architecture / Interaction Design / New Media Studies / Design
Page ९ of ३८
# Page 10
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ- 1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
Management / Ergonomics / Human Factors Engineering / Indian Craft Studies and related fields of Engineering or Design.
AND
Minimum 2 years of professional design experience in Industry / research organization / Design studios.
(i) Fine Arts
Bachelor's and Master's degree in the relevant branch with First Class or equivalent in any one of the two degrees and minimum 2 years of relevant professional experience.
(j) Qualifications for Faculties in Science and Humanities: The qualifications for recruitment and promotions for faculty in the disciplines of Basic Sciences, Social Science and Humanities shall be as per the UGC Notification No. F.1-2/2017(EC/PS) Dated 18th July, 2018 and UGC guidelines issued from time to time.
Note: Candidates who have done Ph.D. after the Bachelor's Degree from institution of National importance with GATE/ GPAT/ CEED shall be eligible for the post of Assistant Professor.
5.2 Minimum Qualification Norms for Direct Recruitments / Promotions for Stage –II to
Stage-VI
(a) Qualification for Assistant Professor (Senior Scale. Level – 11. Entry Pay 68900/-) For Promotion of Incumbents
a. Qualifications prescribed for the post of Assistant Professor AND
b. Should have completed minimum training requirements as per Annexure - III.
AND
C. Should have satisfied any one of the below mentioned set of requirements.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Set No. | Additional Qualification | To have acquired in the cadre of Assistant Professor |
|  |  | Experience (Years) | Research publications in SCIjournals /UGC /AICTE approved list of journals | Avg. 360° feedback score (out of 10) |
| 1 |  | 4 | 2 | 8 to 10 |
| 2 |  | 5 | 1 | 8 to 10 |
| 3 |  | 5 | 2 | 5 to <8 |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(b) Qualifications for Assistant Professor (Selection Grade. Level – 12, Entry Pav 79800/-) For Promotion of Incumbents
a. Qualifications as prescribed for the post of Assistant Professor (Senior Scale) AND
b. Should have completed minimum training requirements as per Annexure - III.
AND
C. Should have satisfied any one of the below mentioned set of requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Set No. | To have acquired in the cadre of Assistant Professor (Senior Scale) |
| Additional Qualification | Experience (Years) | Research publications in SCI journals /UGC / AICTE approved list of journals | Avg. 360° feedback score (out of 10) |
|  |  |  |  | 8 to 10 |
| 2 |  | 4 | 2 | 5 to <8 |
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page १० of ३८
# Page 11
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
(c) Qualifications for Associate Professor (Level – 13A1. Entry Pay 131400/-)
i) For Direct Recruitment
a. Ph.D. degree in the relevant field and First class or equivalent at either Bachelor's or Master's level in the relevant branch
AND
b. At least total 6 research publications in SCI journals / UGC / AICTE approved list of journals.
AND
C. Minimum of 8 years of experience in teaching / research / industry out of which at least 2 years shall be Post Ph.D. experience.
Note: In case of HMCT, 8 years of industry experience at a managerial level not below the position of Head of Department handling a team of 20 persons or more in a 4 star hotel or above category or in a similar position in the hospitality industry / tourism industry.
ii) For Promotion of Incumbents
a. Ph. D. degree in relevant field and First class or equivalent at either Bachelor's or Master's level in the relevant branch.
AND
b. Should have completed minimum training requirements as per Annexure – III.
AND
C. Should have satisfied any one of the below mentioned set of requirements.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Set No. | To have acquired in the cadre of Assistant Professor (Selection Grade). |
| Experience (Years) | Research publications in SCI journals UGC AICTE approved list of journals | Avg. 360° feedback score (out of 10) |
| 1 | 3 | 2 | 5 to <8 |
| 2 | 3 |  | 8 to 10 |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(D) Qualifications for Professor (Level – 14. Entry Pav 144200/-) i) Direct Recruitment
a. Ph. D. degree in relevant field and First class or equivalent at either Bachelor's or Master's level in the relevant branch.
AND
b. Minimum of 10 years of experience in teaching / research / industry out of which at least 3 years shall be at a post equivalent to that of an Associate Professor.
AND
C. At least 6 research publications at the level of Associate Professor in SCI journals / UGC / AICTE approved list of journals and at least 2 successful Ph.D. guided as Supervisor / Co supervisor till the date of eligibility of promotion.
OR
At least 10 research publications at the level of Associate Professor in SCI journals / UGC/AICTE approved list of journals till the date of eligibility of promotion.
ii) For Promotion of the Incumbents
a. Ph. D. degree in relevant field and First Class or equivalent at either Bachelor's or Master's level in the relevant branch.
Page ११ of ३८
# Page 12
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
AND
b. Should have satisfied any one of the below mentioned set of requirements.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Set No. | Ph.D. guided | Total Experience (Years) | To have acquired in the cadre of Associate Professor. |
| Experience (Years) | Research publications in SCI journals/UGC / AICTE approved list of journals | Avg. 360° feedback score (out of 10) |
| 1 | 1 | 15 | 3 |  | 8 to 10 |
| 2 | 2 | 15 | 3 | 6 | 5 to <8 |
| 3 |  | 16 | 3 | 4 | 8 to 10 |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: 360° Feedback
1. The feedback obtained every year, till the date of eligibility of next stage, shall be taken as an average of all the preceding years added together required for promotions
2. In case the candidate fails to achieve the maximum feedback score, the subsequent year's may be taken into consideration while dropping the lowest feedback score in any one the year.
(E) Qualifications for Promotion to Senior Professor (Level –15. Entry Pay 182200/-) a.Ph. D. degree in the relevant field
AND
b. Minimum ten years of experience in the cadre of Professor AND
c. At least 8 research publications in SCI journals / UGC / AICTE approved list of journals, should have at least 2 successful Ph. D. guided as Supervisor / Co-Supervisor as a Professor.
OR
c. At least 8 research publications in SCI journals / UGC / AICTE approved list of journals, should have provided academic leadership as institution head at least for 3 years at the level of Professor.
OR
c. At least 8 research publications in SCI journals / UGC / AICTE approved list of journals, should have provided educational leadership at state / national level at least for 3 years at the level of Professor.
AND
d. At least one patent awarded OR
d. Development of one MOOC course applicable at national platform
Notes: 1. The selection of Senior Professor shall also be based on academic achievements, favorable
review of academic, research and administrative work from three eminent subject experts not below the post of Senior Professor or a Professor of at least ten years of experience.
2. The selection shall be based on ten best publications and award of Ph. D. degrees to at least
two candidates under his / her supervision during the last 10 years and interaction with the Selection Committee constituted as per this regulation.
(F) Qualifications for Direct Recruitment of Principal / Director (Level - 14. Entry Pav 144200/- with the special allowance of Rs. 6750/- per month) a. Ph. D. degree and First Class or equivalent at either Bachelor's or Master's level in the relevant branch
Page १२ of ३८
# Page 13
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
b. At least two successful Ph.D. guided as supervisor / Co-Supervisor and minimum 8 research publications in SCI journals / UGC / AICTE approved list of journals.
C. Minimum 15 years of experience in teaching / research/ industry, out of which at least 3 years shall be at the post equivalent to that of Professor.
Notes: 1. This position shall be of contractual in nature for 5 years and can be extended for one more term depending upon the performance.
2. Performance assessment shall be carried out through a committee appointed by the affiliating university.
3. After completing the final term, the incumbent shall join back his / her parent organization in the previous designation from where he / she has proceeded with the designation as Professor / Senior Professor as the case may be.
6.0 Minimum Qualifications for Direct Recruitment and promotion of other staff 6.1 Workshop Superintendent Initial recruitment of Workshop Superintendent shall be at par with Assistant Professor with the qualification as prescribed for the Assistant Professor in Mechanical/ Production Engineering.
Upward movement and designations shall be as per stage I to stage V as per provisions of this Gov nment esolution indicated in Table
Table 3: Stages of Promotion and Designations for Workshop Superintendent
-----------------------------------------------------
| Stage | Designation |
| Entry Level, Stage-I | Workshop Superintendent |
| Stage-II | Workshop Superintendent (Senior Scale) |
| Stage-III | Workshop Superintendent (Selection Grade) |
| Stage-IV | Associate Professor (Workshop) |
| Stage-V | Professor (Workshop) |
-----------------------------------------------------
6.2 Qualifications for Training and Placement Officer a. Qualifications, service conditions and Pay scales of Training and Placement Officer shall be same as Professor in Engineering & Technology or concerned Technical Program.
b. One of the Professors in the Institute shall be entrusted with additional responsibility of Training and Placement Officer on rotation basis.
C. If Professor is not available, Associate Professor / Assistant Professor may be identified for this post.
6.3 Minimum Qualifications for direct recruitment of Assistant Librarian (Level 10, Entry Pay 57700/-) a. Master's Degree in Library Science/Information Science/ Documentation Science or an Equivalent Professional Degree with at least First Class or equivalent and a consistently good academic record with knowledge of computerization of library.
b. Qualifying in the National Level Test conducted for the purpose by UGC or other equivalent test as approved by the UGC.
6.4 Minimum Qualifications for direct recruitment of Assistant Director-Physical Education (Level-10, Entry Pay 57700/-) a. Master's Degree in Physical Education or Master's Degree in Sports Science or equivalent degree with at least First Class or its equivalent with good academic record from a recognized University/ Institute.
b. Record of having represented the University / College at the inter-University / Inter collegiate competitions or the state and / or national championships;
Page १३ of ३८
# Page 14
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
C. Qualifying in the National-Level Test conducted for the purpose by the UGC or any other agency approved by the UGC and passed the physical fitness test conducted in accordance with these regulations.
d. Record of strong involvement and proven track record of participation in sports, drama, music, films, painting, photography, journalism event management or other student / event management activities during college / University studies.
e. Record of organizing such events as student's convener or in later part of life.
6.5 Methodology of Promotion for Assistant Librarians and Assistant Director-Physical Education The qualifications for promotions Assistant Librarians and Assistant Director-Physical Education shall be as per UGC notification No. F.1-2/2017(EC/PS) dated 18 July 2018
7.0 Additional Requirements 7.1 Research Publications In order to ensure quality of publications for promotions, a minimum standard would be ensured through the following.
a) For the purpose of promotions, candidates must have published research papers in SCI journals OR UGC approved Journals OR AICTE approved list of journals OR jointly approved by AICTE with respective councils / institute such as Council of Architecture / Pharmacy Council of India / Institute of Town Planners, India.
b) In case of HMCT, 1 live case study or 1 live industry project as research / consultancy having credential of very high standing would be recognized as equivalent to 1 publication.
c) In case of Design, Architecture and Town Planning, 1 live case study, 1 live industry project as research / consultancy or 1 exceptional design having credential of very high standing / obtained high level recognition would be recognized as equivalent to 1 publication.
7.2 Equivalence for Ph.D.
Equivalence for PhD is based on publication of 5 International Journal papers, each Journal having a cumulative impact index of not less than 2.0, with incumbent as the main author and all 5 publications being in the authors' area of specialization. Alternatively, the person should have obtained at least two patents or contributed to the increased productivity in the place of work recognized at state or national level or elected as a Fellow of any of the national academies.
However, the procedure of providing equivalence shall be devised by concerned affiliating university.
7.2.1 Eligibility of direct Ph.D. after B.E. / B.Tech The qualification of Ph.D. acquired for the various level of posts directly after B.E/ B.Tech. is applicable in Technical Institutions, provided degree of Ph. D awarded is in relevant discipline by a recognized University following the process of registration, course work and evaluation etc. as prescribed by UGC or has been awarded by the Institutes of national importance (i.e.
IITs/IISc/NITs etc.), duly recognized by the MHRD. Further, candidate should have obtained at least first class at Bachelor's level in Engineering /Technology.
7.3 Class / Division If a class / division is not awarded, minimum of 60% marks in aggregate shall be considered equivalent to first class / division. If a Grade Point System is adopted the CGPA will be converted into equivalent marks as below.
-----------------------------------
| Grade Point | Equivalent Percentage |
| 6.25 | 55 % |
| 6.75 | 60% |
| 7.25 | 65 % |
| 7.75 | 70% |
| 8.25 | 75 % |
-----------------------------------
Page १४ of ३८
# Page 15
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
7.4 Nomenclature of relevant degrees The qualifications for various faculty posts specify that the degree shall be in the appropriate / relevant branch of specialization. Many IITs, NITs, Central Universities start interdisciplinary programs of new nomenclatures. In view of the increasing importance of interdisciplinary nature of engineering, the inter-disciplinary courses for both UG and PG specializations may be considered. The selection committee may take a final decision in this regard depending on the requirement of the program of study and institution. AICTE has already clarified this issue vide Government of India Gazette F. No. 27/RIFD/Pay/01/2017-18 dated 28.04.2017. If any specialization is not available in the AICTE basket, the Board / University shall decide the equivalence based on the curriculum of the program. Hence, incumbent faculty recruited in the past based on their qualifications / specializations acquired will continue to be eligible for promotion as well as direct recruitment in the same or other institutions, subject to fulfillment of other eligibility criteria and higher qualifications as prescribed, if any, for various teaching posts.
7.5 Incumbent faculty Members with previous qualifications Existing incumbents recruited as a Faculty with the basic minimum qualifications such as M.Sc.
(Mathematics), M.Sc. (Biotechnology), M.Sc. (Electronics), M.Sc. (Computer Science & allied subjects), M.Sc. (Physics), M.Sc. (Chemistry), MCA, PGDM, AMIE / M. Com / M.A. and any other similar qualifications which were considered eligible at the time of recruitment or taken admission in such courses before publication of the AICTE Gazette dated 13th March 2010 are to be considered as eligible for promotion as well as direct recruitment in the same or other institutions, subject to fulfillment of other eligibility criteria and higher qualifications as prescribed, if any, for various teaching posts.
7.6 Faculty Members on deputation Any Faculty Member on deputation to some Government Organization / Autonomous Bodies such as DTE / MSBTE / AICTE / UGC / MHRD / DST etc. on academic/administrative positions shall be deemed to have experience of academics and academic administration and be exempted from the requirement of FDP, Industrial Training and 360° feedback. If the faculty has secured at least Very Good rating, it shall be considered equivalent to 8 points on a 10 point scale of 360° feedback in reference to this notification for the period of deputation.
8.0 Option for the revised scales of pay: (i) Within a period of one month from the date of issue of this Government Resolution, the teachers/Librarians and other personnel will have to option in the prescribed form (Annexure V) for the revised pay scales.
(ii) The option once exercised shall be final. Those who do not exercise the option within a period of one month from the date of issue of this Government Resolution shall be deemed to have opted for revised pay scales.
(iii) The teachers /Librarians /other personnel who were in service on 1st January 2016 and those who were not in service after 1st January, 2016 on account of termination, death, discharge on the expiry of the sanction posts, resignation, dismissal or discharge on disciplinary ground and could not exercise the option within the time limit will be deemed to have opted for revised scale of pay with effect from 1st January 2016 and should be held entitled to the benefit of these rules.
(iv) An undertaking (Annexure -VI) shall be taken from every beneficiary under this Scheme to the effect that any excess payment made on account of incorrect fixation of pay in the revised pay scales or any other excess payment made shall be adjusted against the future payments due or otherwise to the beneficiary in the same manner as provided in HRD Ministry's O.M.
No. F.237/2008IFD dated 23.10.2008., read with Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) O.M.No.F. 11/2008- IC, dated 30.08.2008.
Page १५ of ३८
# Page 16
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
9.0 Procedure to be followed for fixation of pay and for the disbursement of salary grants Following procedure shall be followed for fixation of pay and disbursement of salary grants: i) Regional Offices of Technical Education shall fix the revised pay of all the teachers, librarians and equivalent cadres under their jurisdiction as per this scheme in the Proforma as prescribed in Annexure-VII and further certify that:
"all the teachers/ librarians have been lawfully appointed,
"the pay of each teacher has been properly fixed as per this scheme and
"in case it is found that any excess payment has been made on account of incorrect fixation and unlawful appointees the same shall be recovered by the Government from the grants (including salary grants) payable to the institutes."
Some possible illustrations for pay fixation are given in Annexure-VIII.
ii) Regional Offices shall submit these certificates along with the fixation forms etc. to the Director, Technical Education who shall thereafter release the necessary grants after broadly satisfying themselves and making necessary entries of pay fixation in the service books of the employees. Director, Technical Education may authorize the officer for approving necessary entries in the service book.
iii) All Career Advancements with improvement in designations shall have to be approved by the Government.
iv) The Director of Technical Education, Maharashtra State, Mumbai, should send a quarterly statement to the Accountant General, Maharashtra-1, Mumbai, and the Accountant General, Maharashtra-2, Nagpur, and claim the admissible grants from the Government of India, for the implementation of revised pay scales to the teachers and librarians in degree level institutions, before 31-03-2020. The Accountant General, Maharashtra – 1/2, Mumbai/ Nagpur should be requested to credit the Government of India's share under receipt head "1601 Grant-in-aid from Central Government, (01) (07) Technical Education (1601 0243)"
v) The additional expenditure on pay proper, on account of revision of scales of pay of teachers in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technology University, Lonere, Institute of Chemical Technology, Matunga, Mumbai, Government deemed University Government and Non-Government aided degree level institutions as on 1st January 2016 shall be shared for the period from 1st January 2016 to 31st March 2019 between the Government of India and the State Government in the ratio of 50:50. Thereafter, the entire liability on account of this additional expenditure will be borne by the State Government. Posts which were not lying vacant for more than six months as on 1st January 2016 in these institutes will be treated as post existing as on 1st January 2016, for this purpose. The additional expenditure on pay proper, on account of application of revised pay scales to all posts of teachers created after 1st January 2016 shall be borne entirely by the State Government. The Universities and non-Government aided colleges should be informed that any additional expenditure on new posts of teachers created hereafter shall be disallowed, if proper sanction of the Director of Technical Education, Maharashtra State, Mumbai, has not been obtained by them.
10.0 Budget Heads: The expenditure on this account should be debited to the following sub- heads and detailed heads of accounts under the budget head - Demand No. W-3 "2203 - Technical Education" as under: 001, Direction and Administration (01), Direction and Administration, (01)(01) Director of Technical Education (Committed) (2203 0013) (2203 0022)
Page १६ of ३८
# Page 17
Government Resolution No.: सावेआ-1111/प्र.क्र.44/19/तां.शि.2
102 - Assistance to Universities for Technical Education
(01) (01) Maintenance Grants to Mumbai University for Technical College of Architecture (Committed) (2203 0069)
(01)(02) Maintenance Grants to Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technical University, Lonere, District Raigad (Committed) (2203 0523)
104 - Assistance to Non-Government Technical Colleges and Degree Institutes (01)(03) Engineering Colleges (Committed) (2203 0167) (03)(04) Establishment of Institute of Chemical Technology and its sub-centers (Scheme) 31- Grant-in-aid (non-salary)
36- Grant-in-aid (Salary)
108 - Examinations -
(01)(01) Board of Technical Examination (Committed) (2203 0283)
112 - Engineering/Technical Colleges and Degree Institutes (01) Government Engineering and Architectural Colleges (including hostels) (2203 0327) (00) (10) Establishment of New Engineering Colleges (2203 2671)
Government orders in respect of the measures required for enhancing and improving the quality of education shall be issued separately. All advancements to higher grade pays in various cadres will be effected subject to the minimum excellent (A) level of average confidential report, very good performance appraisal report through 360° feedback score and Career Advancement Schemes terms and
conditions mentioned in this Government Resolution for various posts are being prescribed by the Government.
This Government Resolution is subject to the decision taken by the State Government on the scheme forwarded by All India Council of Technical Education by its Notification dated 01st March
2019, therefore anomalies if any brought to the notice of the Department of Higher and Technical Education, Government of Maharashtra through proper channel.
These orders are issued with the concurrence of the Finance Department vide their unofficial reference No. 347/2019/Seva-9 dated 05/09/2019 and with concurrence of State Cabinet held on
09/09/2019.
# Page 18
# Page 19
# Page 20
# Page 21
# Page 22
# Page 23
# Page 24
# Page 25
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37
# Page 38