# Page 1
Purchase of furniture required for Government Model Degree College Nandurbar College
Administrative approval of the work to be done
Regarding the payment - a clean sheet.
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Higher and Technical Education
Government Refinance Sheet No: Narrow-2025 / Q.No.57 / VISHI-2
Mantralaya Extension Building, Mumbai-400 032.
Date: 16th April, 2025.
Reference: - The serial number of the department. Government Decision on 21.03.2025.
Government Refinement: -
Government Model Degree College in the building constructed for Nandurbar College as well as
For the purchase of necessary furniture for the boys and girls hostel, Rs. 257,00,000 - (Rupees Two Crore Fifty Five Lakh only) The budget has been given administrative approval. the above-mentioned
In the Government Decision No. In the 1: -
"Such a procurement process should be done at the level of poetess Bahinabai Chaudhary North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon. , "it said.
Instead of the
"At the level of Joint Director of Procurement Process, Higher Education, Jalgaon Division.
should be done. "It should be read.
Other terms and conditions of the Government decision in question shall remain in force.
The Government Corrigendum has been made available on the Government of Maharashtra website.
The code is 202504161601475408. The order is being authenticated with a digital signature.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra,
(P. P. Lubal)
Deputy Secretary, Government of Maharashtra
per, 1) ma. Secretary to the Governor and Chancellor, Raj Bhavan, Malabar Hill, Mumbai.
Private Secretary to the Hon'ble Minister (Higher and Technical Education), Mantralaya, Mumbai.
3) Private Secretary to the Hon'ble Minister of State (Higher and Technical Education), Mantralaya, Mumbai.
4) Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Higher and Technical Education, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
5) Accountant General, (Accounts & Accounts) -1 / 2 Maharashtra, Mumbai / Nagpur.
Accountant General, (Audit) -1 / 2 Maharashtra, Mumbai / Nagpur.
7) Director, Higher Education, Maharashtra State, Pune.
8) Registrar, Poetess Bahinabai Chaudhary North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon.
9) Divisional Joint Director, Higher Education. Jalgaon.
10) Under Officer (Budget Branch), Department of Higher and Technical Education, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
11) Cell Officer (Expenditure-5), Finance Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai.
12) Selection (VC-II), Department of Higher and Technical Education, Mantralaya, Mumbai.