# Page 1
Other Ministries under Scheduled Castes Appropriation
Centrally Sponsored by Departments
Regarding disbursement of funds in the year 2023-24 of the schemes.
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance
Government Circular No: FY 2024 / Q.61 / Budget
Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg, Mantralaya, Mumbai 400032
Date: 12th March, 2024
Read: - Department of Finance, Government Circular No. December 8, 2023
Circular
Central share of funds received from the Central Government in respect of Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State share of the same.
Necessary instructions regarding the transfer of funds to a single nodal account within the prescribed time frame have been issued by the Department of Finance. of 05.12.2023
Circulars have been issued. Funds received from the Central Government are also deposited in the Consolidated Fund of the State.
All the concerned departments are being informed by the Finance Department through e-mail about the same. Following this, the Finance Department issued a notification. The original budgetary provision made for Centrally Sponsored Schemes by the circular dated 08.12.2023 and
The budgetary allocation made by way of supplementary demand is central share and equal state share to all ministries.
The departments have been made 100 per cent available on the beams system. According to the Finance Department. Original for Centrally Sponsored Schemes under Scheduled Castes Application pursuant to the circular of 08.12.2023
The budgetary provision made by way of budgetary provision and supplementary demand is the central share and the equivalent state share.
100% is being distributed on the BEAMS system to all the Ministries / Departments implementing the SC sub-scheme.
2. Funds received from the Central Government are credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State only after ensuring that the funds are credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State.
Necessary action should be taken regarding expenditure. For this, the central share for the year 2023-24 and the corresponding state
There is no need to send the balance of payments to the Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance. The state share will be spent at par with the Centre's share, as well as the Scheduled Caste Appropriation Fund for the Scheduled Castes and the neo-Buddhists.
Care should be taken to ensure that the item itself will be spent.
This Government Circular has been made available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in.