# Page 1
Regarding appointment of Nodal Officer for PM GatiShakti National Master Plan, an ambitious initiative of the Central Government.
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance,
GOVERNMENT ORDER NUMBER: - BGT-2025 / P.No.4 / Budget (VISHYO)
Mantralaya Extension, Mumbai-400 032
Date: May 15, 2025
Read: - 1) Government Decisions, Industries, Power and Labour & Mining Department No.IDC-2024 / P.No.111 / Industries-2, D. 12.08.2024 2) Ma. Letter from the Office of the Chief Secretary, Mantralaya, Mumbai. 7.3.2025
Introduction: - Read Industry, Energy B Labour B Mining Department No. 1 D. Under the government decision of 12.8.2024, consolidated orders have been issued regarding the formation of committees for the ambitious initiative of the central government called PM GatiShakti National Master Plan. Accordingly, regarding the PM GatiShakti Portal, Shri.
The meeting was chaired by the Chief Secretary, Government of Maharashtra. The meeting was held on 5.3.2025.
Read from the Chief Secretary's Office in line with the meeting on d. 5.3.2025 The TAK instructions from the meetings have been issued under the letter dated 7.3.2025. As per the instructions, the administrative departments have been directed to appoint Joint Secretary / Deputy Secretary, preferably related to infrastructure projects, as the nodal officer for the PM GatiShakti portal. Accordingly, the government was considering appointing a nodal officer of the Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance for the ambitious initiative of the central government, the PM GatiShakti National Master Plan.
GOVERNMENT ORDER: - Shri S.N. Bagul, Joint Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Mumbai is being appointed as the "Nodal Officer" for the ambitious initiative of the Central Government, PM GatiShakti National Master Plan, related to the infrastructure schemes of the Department.
The Government Order is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.