# Page 1
To give administrative sanction to the expenditure incurred for development of Chavdar Lake and its surrounding area at Mahad under Development of Cultural and Historical Sites on the occasion of 125th Birth Anniversary Year of Bharat Ratna Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar.
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance
Government Corrigendum No: BCH-2026 / Q.10 / Constructions
Madam Cama Marg, Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai 400 032.
Date: March 6, 2026.
Reference: - Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance, Government Decision No. BCH-2026 / No.10 / Constructions, Govt. 18.02.2026.
-: Government Corrigendum: -
As the development of Chavdar Lake and its surroundings in Mahad is an ambitious project of the State Government under the Development of Cultural and Historical Sites to commemorate the 125th birth anniversary year of Bharat Ratna Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar; the estimated amount for this work is Rs. 55,79,85, 653 / - with respect to the construction budget decided by the Government. Administrative approval was granted subject to the prescribed Articles under 18.02.2026. The Government decision should read condition number "(a) Executive Mechanism for the said work shall be Mahad Municipal Council, Mahad" (b) Executive Mechanism for the said work shall be Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC), Mahad. "
(2) The other provisions of the Government Decision shall remain in force.
The Government Corrigendum is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www-maharashtra.gov.in with its computer code No. It is 202603061230556322. The certificate is being digitally signed and authenticated.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.
CONN ATH runs
(Somnath Bagul)
Joint Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, "Oo Ma. Minister, Private Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice, Mumbai.
Hon'ble Minister of State, Private Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice, Mumbai.
YD Principal Secretary, Social Justice and Special Assistance Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai Personal Assistant.
Commissioner, Social Welfare, Pune.
EK Chief Engineer, Regional Department of Public Works, Mumbai.
Chief Executive Officer, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC), Mumbai.
EM Chief Officer, Mahad Municipal Council, Mahad.
Accountant General Maharashtra 1 / 2 (Audit / Accountancy), Mumbai / Nagpur eR Divisional Officer / Assistant Engineer, Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC), Mahad.
10. Regional Deputy Commissioner, Social Welfare Department, Mumbai 119. Assistant Commissioner, Social Welfare, Raigad.
12. District Treasury Officer, Raigad.
13. Selections / constructions.