# Page 1
With regard to the extension of three months for candidates to submit caste validity certificates for admission to engineering, medical and other professional courses in educational institutions for this academic year.
Government of Maharashtra
Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance
Government Circular No: - CBC-2025 / Q. No.131 / Mavak
Martyr Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg,
Mantralaya (Extension), Mumbai-32.
Dated September 4, 2026
Circular
Reference: - General Administration Department, Government Decision: - Shrinking-2024 / Q. No.75 (Part-I) / Reservation-5
d. 02.07.2026
The candidates belonging to Socially and Educationally Backward Class (SEBC) and Other Backward Class (OBC) category are admitted for admission to professional courses (including engineering, medicine and other professional courses) in various educational institutions in the state in the current academic year. They have been given an extension of six months from the date of application for admission to submit the validity certificate subject to the decision of the General Administration Department Government in question.
Scheduled Castes, Denotified Castes, Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes.
Admission of candidates has been fixed, but some of these candidates have caste validity certificates.
For admission to this educational institution in view of the difficulties faced in submission.
Caste Validity Certificate for candidates (including engineers, doctors, and other professional courses)
To be presented. From the date of issue of this circular dated 04.09.2026, the following 3
The deadline is being extended by months. It will be mandatory for the candidate concerned to submit the caste verification certificate within this 3-month period.
The 3-month deadline given to the students to submit the caste certificate is the last opportunity and no extension will be granted thereafter.
This Government Circular is available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in.