# Page 1
Regarding the duties and responsibilities of the posts included in the Scheduled Tribe Certificate Scrutiny Committees under the Tribal Development Department.
The Government of Maharashtra
the Tribal Development Department
GOVERNMENT NO.: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ K. 15
Madame Cama's way,
Hutatma Rajguru Chowk Mantralaya Mumbai
The date: October 30, 2018.
Preamble: The functioning of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committees functioning under the Tribal Development Department is quasi-judicial in nature. Therefore, there is an urgent need to determine the duties and responsibilities of the posts of officers and employees in the inspection committees as the work of the inspection committees must be completed quickly, smoothly and within the stipulated time. Therefore, to determine the duties and responsibilities of the posts of officers and staff in the inspection committees, the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune, has submitted a proposal to the government in the meeting of all concerned in the capacity of chairman. Considering the proposal submitted by the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune to the government, the matter of determining the duties and responsibilities of the posts of officers and employees in the Scheduled Tribe Certificate Scrutiny Committees was under the consideration of the government. The government has taken the following decisions:
Government's decision:
The following posts are included in the office of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee functioning under the Tribal Development Department.
Joint Commissioner& Vice-Chairman 2) Deputy Director (Research) 3) Law Officer 4) Senior Research Officer (Legal& Service/ Pre-Service) 5) Deputy Superintendent of Police 6) Inspector of Police 7) Research Officer 8) Research Officer (Vigilance Squad) 9) Research Officer (Academic, Appeal& Election, Grievances) 10) Manager
# Page 2
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
Junior Administrative Officer (JAO) 12) Research Assistant (RAS) 13) Research Assistant (RAS) 14) Police Constable (RP) 15) Record Keeper
The duties and responsibilities of the above positions are as follows:
(1) The duties and responsibilities of the office of Joint Commissioner and Vice-Chairman:
(1) The Joint Commissioner shall act as the head of the office of the respective Inspection Committee.
(2) As the head of the office, the concerned inspection committee shall monitor, review and guide the work of the office from time to time as required.
(3) Appointment of a Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
(4) to act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Denotified Castes, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003, made thereunder.
Transfer of cases received through e-Tribe Validity System (e-Tribe Validity) related to service, pre-service, educational, election, etc. as well as receiving, appeal and court cases to the concerned office officer (Senior Research Officer, Research Officer, Law Officer, Deputy Superintendent of Police).
6) Review all the cases pending with the Police Vigilance Team from time to time and keep a check on the pending work.
7) In the event of a dispute. To take action on the matter as per the guidance of the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute Pune, Chairman.
8) To guide the concerned authorities in the complex matter of hearing the case of the applicant claiming Scheduled Tribe and closed for order.
9) As the head of the office, if a contempt petition is filed in any court case of the committee, then further appropriate proceedings should be completed in a time-bound manner and it should be ensured that such contempt petitions are not filed in the future.
10) To conduct judicial training classes twice a year for all class-1, class-2 and vigilance team officers/ staff of the committee as head of the office.
Page 2 of 22.
# Page 3
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
To recommend the names of officers to the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune.
As the head of the office, computerize/ digitize all the records (old/ new) and all the judicial cases in the committee and complete the work within the prescribed time by taking other actions accordingly.
12). To assist the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune, in the work of the Committee.
13) To complete other responsibilities assigned by the government within the stipulated time.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Deputy Director (Research):
(1) to act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Denotified Castes, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003 framed thereunder.
(ii) To perform all the functions of the Member Secretary on the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
(3) To deal with and control the cases received through e-tribe Validity System.
4) Transfer of cases received through eTribe Validity to the concerned service, pre-service, educational, election, other cases, etc. as well as appeal and court cases to the concerned office officer (Senior Research Officer, Research Officer, Law Officer, Deputy Superintendent of Police).
5) Selecting the panel in the case received through the eTribe Validity System and found suitable for investigation, fixing the date of the committee meeting, voting and transferring it to the concerned authority for preparing the order (valid/ invalid), checking and approving the order, giving it to the concerned authority for preparing the validity certificate, signing and issuing the validity certificate to the concerned authority.
6) Selecting the panel, fixing the date of the committee meeting, voting and transferring the cases to the police vigilance team in the case received through the e-Tribe Validity System and required to be investigated by the police vigilance team.
(7) The applicant, his parents, his parents for deposition as required in the case transferred to the Police Vigilance Team for investigation.
Page 22 of 3.
# Page 4
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
Summons under section 9 of the said said Act, 2000 under the signature of the Deputy Director and Member Secretary to the concerned for recording the statements of other relatives of the deceased and for collecting evidence from various agencies.
8) Review the judicial, service, education, election, appeals, complaints, police vigilance team from time to time and make appropriate suggestions and take appropriate action as required.
9) To schedule the hearing of the applicants in the case of Scheduled Tribe Certificate Verification and to send the hearing letter.
10) In the case of completion of the investigation by the Police Vigilance Team, the action to send the show-cause notice to the concerned along with the investigation report with the signature of the Deputy Director and Member Secretary and to keep a check.
11) To allocate funds to all the concerned officers of the committee for preparing the order within the stipulated time in the case closed for decision and to examine and finalize the draft of the order prepared by the concerned officers.
12) After the final order is passed within the prescribed time, the member secretary shall sign and transfer the order to the concerned authority for issue. Also to control the work related to issuing orders within the prescribed time limit.
(13) To consider the legal opinion of the law officer in the cases filed and to be filed in the Supreme Court and submit a proposal to the Government without delay to appoint a special counsel for the case, if necessary.
14) To take further appropriate action in the cases filed and to be filed in the Supreme Court within the prescribed time, taking into account the legal opinion of the law officer.
15) In the judicial cases in the examining committees, the Law Officer shall act as Member Secretary in accordance with the legal opinion. filing of affidavits in the courts.
16) To provide the necessary information regarding the case to the Government Prosecutor/ Special Counsel in the court cases of the Scrutiny Committees without delay. Attending the court on the dates of the petition cases as per requirement/ submitting the intimation and overall information of the case to the AGP/ GP/ AG through the Law Officer.
17). Page 4 out of page 22 of the relevant case after taking legal opinion of the Law Officer, Government Prosecutor, Special Counsel, etc. of the High Court Adjudicating Committee.
# Page 5
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
If needed, based on quality. To prepare a proposal for filing a special leave petition in the Supreme Court with the help of the law officers and submit it through the Joint Commissioner and the Vice-Chairman.
18) Preparation of detailed case history in respect of judicial matters by the Law Officer and keeping it for the perusal of the Committee.
To assist the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune in collecting information about the rare reference books, books and other documents of the Scheduled Tribes and to collect information about the concerned tribes along with documentary evidence.
20) To handle all correspondence received by the office of the Committee and to direct and follow up the same with the concerned office bearers/ staff.
Submission of Daily Progress Report (DPR) and Monthly Progress Report (MPR) to the Senior Office.
22) Review the validity of the certificates on a regular basis and obtain the same on demand as required.
23) Preparing information according to the agenda in accordance with the meeting at different levels and presenting it to the superiors and attending the meeting as needed.
24) To assist the Joint Commissioner and the Vice-Chairman in the day-to-day affairs and to comply with the directions and orders given by them from time to time.
(3) Duties and Responsibilities of the Law Officer:
9. To accept the notices of the petitions filed against Government/Scrutiny
Committee and to appraise the Government/Scrutiny Committeeabout the cases filed and admitted in Hon'ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court.
To prepare and submit para-wise reply within stipulated time.
3. To prepare draft affidavit for perusal of Government Pleader as and when necessary within stipulated time.
8. To liaise with the Government Pleader/Special Counsel appearing of behalf of Government/Scrutiny Committee as and when needed.
y. To attend the court on the concerned dates of the petitions and brief to
Government Pleader/Special Counsel who is appearing of behalf of Government/Scrutiny Committee before the Hon'ble Court.
&. To collect the legal opinion of the matter from the concern Government
Pleader/Special Counsel after the final order passed by Hon'ble Court in given stipulated time period and also give its legal opinion to the committee regarding fitness of the matter for filing the special leave petition before the
Page 22 of 5.
# Page 6
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
Hon'ble Supreme Court or any other petition/application/Misc. application
etc. before any court of law.
v. To provide the legal opinion collected from Government Pleader/Special
Counsel with the legal opinion of herself/himself to the Deputy Director cum
Secretary of the Scrutiny Committee within the period of not more than 90
working days.
2. In case of any contempt petition against the any member of the
committee/committee the concern law officer shall request to the
Government for legal assistance within stipulated period.
. The decision from High Court/Supreme Court or the remand back
matters/cases which require to be decided within stipulated time limit or any
action is expected to be taken by the committee, should brought into the
notice Deputy Director cum Secretary and Joint Commissioner cum Vice
Chairman of the Committee for further necessary action.
90.To advise the Scrutiny Committee while implementing and complying any
order/directions of the Hon'ble Court as and when required.
99.To take all necessary action on behalf of committee for filing caveat in any
important matter as per the directions received either from Government or
from Joint Commissioner cum Vice Chairman of the Committee.
92. To appraise the Scrutiny Committees with the existing case laws of various
courts.
93. To render legal advice to the Commissioner, TRTI, Pune and Scrutiny
Committee as and when required in any other matter.
98.To compile and circulate the decisions of High Court and Supreme Court to
all Scrutiny Committees, Commissioner, TRTI, Pune and Government.
94. To maintain the scanned data of all court matters and make it available to the
Government as and when demanded and required.
9&.To maintain and update data of all court matters and make it available as and
when demanded.
90.To maintain daily board of all court matters and provide the copy of the said
board to the Joint Commissioner cum Vice Chairman and Deputy Director
cum Member Secretary.
To co-ordinate with the Government for getting the approval for filing
special leave petition before Hon'ble Supreme Court of India within stipulated
time period.
Page 22 of 6.
# Page 7
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
19.To conduct the review meeting of all court matters, pending matters and to prepare monthly report in this regard and to keep control over on all ongoing litigations before the Hon'ble Court. This report should be sent on a monthly basis to the Joint Commissioner cum Vice Chairman, Commissioner, TRTI, Pune cum Chairman and Government without any failure.
20.To get in touch with Under Secretary (Law), Tribal Development Department,
Mantralaya, Mumbai for translation of documents, preparation of S.L.P's, appointment of Special Counsel, to get approval on draft affidavit for Supreme Court of India.
29.To help in daily work&follow the instructions and orders of Deputy Director cum Member SecretaryJoint Commissioner cum Vice Chairman of the Committee
(Two posts of Senior Research Officer are sanctioned in the Committee. One of the officers will be in charge of the legal department and the other will be in charge of the service and pre-service work. )
(a) Duties and Responsibilities of Senior Research Officer (Law):
Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukta Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Caste Certificate (Issue and verification thereof)
To act and to be governed by the provisions of the Maharashtra Regulation) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and Rules thereunder, 2003.
(ii) To act as a member of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
3) To work and control the cases received through eTribe Validity System.
4) Checking the cases received by the eTribe Validity System, voting in the case, preparing the order (valid/ invalid), checking and approving the order, uploading the order by the office, preparing the validity certificate and sending the validity certificate to the Deputy Director as a signatory.
5) Ma. To get information about the cases being heard by the committee by seeing the board on the court's website and bring it to the notice of the higher authorities.
6) Ma. Review the cases filed and to be filed in the Supreme Court and High Courts on a regular basis and ensure that timelines are adhered to.
Page 22 of 7.
# Page 8
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
(viii) To examine and bring to the notice of the superior the new petitions received from the court, orders in judicial matters and other judicial, governmental and ancillary correspondence.
8) To file affidavits in the Supreme Court and High Court as required.
9) To provide information to the committee and the petition case on behalf of the government in contact with the public prosecutor. Attending and reporting cases on the dates of the petition cases to the court as required.
(10) To compile the judgments of the Supreme Court and the High Courts from time to time and to present the judicial opinion as directed therein.
(11) To collect information about rare reference books and books of the Scheduled Tribes and to use the information of the concerned tribes along with documentary evidence in the work of the committee and to facilitate the decision.
12) In case of errors found after studying the case submitted in the Scheduled Tribe certificate examination case, inform the concerned applicant, get it completed, put the complete case before the committee for decision and bring it to the notice of the concerned officers.
13) To send a show-cause notice (inquiry report) with the signature of the Deputy Director and the Member Secretary in the case where the investigation is completed by the Police Vigilance Team.
14) To schedule hearing of applicants in the case of Scheduled Tribe certificate verification and to send the hearing letter with the signature of the Deputy Director and the Member Secretary.
15) Prepare a detailed case history of each case before the hearing and keep it for the perusal of the committee.
16) Participation in the hearing of applicants in connection with the verification of the Scheduled Tribe certificate.
17) To prepare documentary evidence on the basis of rare references and books of Scheduled Tribes and include it in court cases.
18) Participation in the day-to-day affairs of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
19) To guide the research officers in the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee on the preparation of tribal data. To guide and assist the Research Officer working in the Vigilance team in the matter of investigation.
20) To assist in the work of investigation/ investigation of suspected cases in connection with the verification of tribal certificates.
21. Controlling the work of preparing invalid orders in cases closed for adjudication and issuing invalid orders within time limit.
Page 22 of 8.
# Page 9
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
To assist the Joint Commissioner and Vice-Chairperson, Deputy Director and Member Secretary and Law Officer in the day-to-day affairs and to comply with the directions and orders given by them from time to time.
Duties and responsibilities of Senior Research Officer (Service/ Pre-Service):
(1) To act and to be governed by the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukta Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Castes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and Rules thereunder, 2003.
(ii) To act as a member of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
3) To work and control the cases received through eTribe Validity System.
4) Checking the cases received by the login through eTribe Validity, voting in the case, preparing the order (valid/ invalid), checking and approving the order, uploading the order by the office, preparing the validity certificate and sending the validity certificate to the Deputy Director as a signatory.
5) To file affidavits in the Supreme Court and High Court as required.
(6) To compile the judgments of the Supreme Court and the High Courts from time to time and to present the judicial opinion as directed therein.
7) To collect information about rare reference books of the Scheduled Tribes and to use the information of the concerned tribes along with documentary evidence in the work of the committee and to facilitate the decision.
(8) To bring to the notice of the concerned authorities, if there is any error found after studying the case submitted in the Scheduled Tribe certificate inspection case, to inform the concerned applicant, to complete it and to place the complete case before the committee for decision.
9) To prepare documentary evidence on the basis of rare references and books of Scheduled Tribes and include it in court cases.
10) Participation in the day-to-day affairs of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
11) To guide the research officers in the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee on the preparation of tribal data. To guide and assist the Research Officer working in the Vigilance team in the matter of investigation.
(12) To conduct in-depth independent inquiry/ assist in the work of inquiry in the case of doubtful cases in connection with the verification of tribal certificate.
Page 22 of 9.
# Page 10
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
13) To send a show-cause notice (inquiry report) with the signature of the Deputy Director and the Member Secretary in the case where the investigation is completed by the Police Vigilance Team.
14) To schedule hearing of applicants in the case of Scheduled Tribe certificate verification and to send the hearing letter with the signature of the Deputy Director and the Member Secretary.
15) Prepare a detailed case history of each case before the hearing and keep it for the perusal of the committee.
16) Participation in the hearing of applicants in connection with the verification of the Scheduled Tribe certificate.
17) To regulate the activities related to preparation of invalid orders in cases closed for adjudication and issuing of invalid orders within the time limit.
18) To act as an Appellate Authority under the Right to Information Act.
19) Keeping up-to-date information, preparing information, following up on cases and preparing comments in line with the review meeting of the Scheduled Tribes Welfare Committee.
To assist the Joint Commissioner and Vice-Chairman, Deputy Director and Member Secretary and Law Officer in the day-to-day affairs and to comply with the directions and orders given by them from time to time.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Deputy Superintendent of Police:
(1) to act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Denotified Castes, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003 framed thereunder.
(2) The Inspection Committee shall allocate and control all the cases referred to the Vigilance Committee for investigation in respect of school, home, revenue etc. among the Inspectors of Police under them.
(3) Before initiating physical inquiry in respect of school, home, revenue etc. in the cases received, the concerned Inspector of Police shall make a first-hand study of the cases with the concerned Inspector of Police, determine the contours of the inquiry and the evidence to be collected during the inquiry, in consultation with the Deputy Director (Research) and Member Secretary and the Law Officer of the Inquiry Committee in this regard, and accordingly give further directions to the concerned Inspector of Police.
(4) to issue summons issued by the examining committee under section 9 of the said mentioned Act, 2000 to the concerned for recording the statement of the applicant, his parents, other relatives in relation to blood donation from the father, as required in the case received, and to collect evidence from various agencies.
Page 22 of 10.
# Page 11
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
(vi) To plan the applicant's tour for conducting in-depth investigation in the case and to prepare a plan for the vehicle made available to the Police Vigilance Team and to complete the investigation in at least 25 cases per Inspector within the prescribed time limit. If the necessary vehicles have not been provided to the vigilance team by the head of the office, the facts in this regard should be submitted without delay to the Chairman and Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune, by letter and a copy should be sent to the government.
6) To certify the monthly payments of the Inspector of Police and the Police Constable at the end of the month and send them to the Deputy Director (Research) and the Member Secretary.
7) After the completion of the investigation, the opinion of the research officer, the vigilance team and the evidence collected by the vigilance team should be taken into account and the case should be immediately transferred to the concerned office for further action by giving its own self-explanatory opinion.
8) Weekly review of the work of investigation assigned to the police inspector.
9) To exercise superintendence over the affairs of all police inspectors and police constables.
10) As directed by the Committee. To make a planned programme of immediate inquiry into a matter of great importance or judicial importance as directed by the court and to take further action accordingly.
Daily Progress Report (DPR), Monthly Progress Report (MPR) to Deputy Director and Member Secretary and Joint Commissioner and Vice-Chairman without any delay.
12) The police investigation. Compilation of Judgments of the Supreme Court/ High Court from time to time.
13) Deputy Superintendents of Police to personally investigate at least 10 cases per month, if a large number of cases are pending for investigation with the vigilance team or if required.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Police Inspector:
(1) To act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukta Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Regulation of Issue and Verification of Scheduled Tribes Certificate) Rules, 2003, made thereunder.
2) The Inspector of Police shall conduct home, school and other inquiries in at least 25 cases each month.
Page 22 of 11.
# Page 12
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
(3) To make a preliminary study of the cases to be received for in-depth investigation by the Committee and to determine the direction of the investigation by discussing with the Deputy Superintendent of Police and the Research Officer (Vigilance Team) and the Law Officer of the Committee.
4) To plan the possible tour program regarding the case-wise investigation and to get it approved by the Deputy Superintendent of Police.
5) Prepare a plan for the vehicle provided for the inquiry and complete the inquiry within the prescribed time limit. Filling in the daily logbook of the used vehicle, signing. At the end of the month, the tour daily should be submitted to the Deputy Superintendent of Police for approval.
(6) To conduct in-depth investigation of the case by giving necessary instructions to the police constable regarding the investigation cases and to conduct in-depth investigation of the case at the residence of the applicant/ his father's blood relative etc. as well as at the native place/ place with the constable and to collect evidence and prepare a report within the prescribed time limit and submit it to the Research Officer (Vigilance Team).
(7) While making a detailed inquiry in the inquiry case, the following shall be done: (a) to examine the prima facie case whether the certificate of tribe submitted by the applicant has been issued by the competent authority of the time and to obtain evidence in writing confirming its genuineness and submit it along with the report.
(b) in the case of an applicant, to verify the authenticity of all the documents and records submitted by him and to obtain a colour-shaded copy of the evidence thereon attested by the competent authority and submit the same along with the report, after confirming its authenticity in writing.
(a) to ascertain the place of residence of the applicant, his other paternal relatives and his ancestors as on 6.9.1950 and accordingly obtain the original documents and evidences in colour, attested by the concerned competent authority and submit the same along with the report.
(d) to record the detailed genealogy of the applicant in relation to his paternal bloodline and accordingly obtain the evidence from all the documents of other relatives in relation to paternal bloodline and submit the same along with the report duly attested by the competent authority concerned.
(e) to record during inquiry, if the case of persons related to the blood of the applicant's father has been valid/ invalidated, and to submit the report along with the information given by the concerned person who has been valid/ invalidated.
Page 22 of 12.
# Page 13
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
(f) If during the inquiry, any lacuna, extra writing, separate scribbled notes, separate ink notes, forged documents, etc. are found in the documents submitted by the applicant, obtain a colour-shaded copy of the original/ available document attested by the concerned competent authority and submit it along with the inquiry report and mention it in the enquiry report.
(c) The inquiry report shall clearly state the date of visit to the applicant's native village, the persons visited and statements recorded, clearly state the documents found to be reliable and obtain a colour-shaded copy attested by the competent authority concerned and submit it along with the report. Also to give self-explanatory opinion in the inquiry report.
(h) To submit monthly progress reports to the Deputy Superintendent of Police without delay, giving details of the cases in which investigations have been completed every month.
Duties and responsibilities of the Research Officer:
(1) To act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukta Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes (Regulation of Certification and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes (Regulation of Certification and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003, made thereunder.
(ii) To act as a member of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
3) To check the cases received by the login through eTribe Validity system, to vote on the case, to prepare the draft of valid/ invalid order within the stipulated time frame and submit it to the senior research officers for examination and approval, to upload all the orders passed by the committee.
(iv) to cooperate fully with the law officer in any case arising out of the investigation by the Inquiry Committee.
(v) To prepare a detailed case history in respect of the matter for filing of affidavits in the Supreme Court and the High Court as may be required and to place the same for perusal of the Committee.
To assist the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune in collecting information about the rare reference books, books and other documents of the Scheduled Tribes and collecting information about the concerned tribes along with documentary evidence.
Page 22 of 13.
# Page 14
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
7) In the case of Scheduled Tribe certificate verification, if there is any error after studying the case submitted, then the applicant concerned should be informed, completed, the complete case should be placed before the committee for decision and the matter should be brought to the notice of the concerned officers.
8) To guide and assist the other research officers in the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee in preparing the data of the tribe. To guide and assist the Research Officer working in the Vigilance team in the matter of investigation.
9) To conduct in-depth independent inquiry/ assist in the work of inquiry in the case of doubtful cases in connection with the verification of tribal certificate.
10) To send the detailed investigation report received from the Vigilance team in the case in which the investigation was completed by the Police Vigilance Team and all the evidence obtained along with it, along with the show cause notice to the concerned without delay with the signature of the Deputy Director and Member Secretary.
11) To schedule hearing of applicants in the case of Scheduled Tribe Certificate Verification and to send the hearing letter with the signature of the Deputy Director and the Member Secretary.
12) Prepare a detailed case history of each case before the hearing and keep it for the perusal of the committee.
13) Participation in the hearing of applicants in connection with the verification of the Scheduled Tribe certificate.
(14) To prepare the draft of the order within the prescribed time limit and submit it within the prescribed time limit for final approval of the Deputy Director (Research) and the Member Secretary in the case of closure for decision by the Member Secretary on the basis of the final decision of the Scrutiny Committee.
Issue and upload all orders finalized by the Committee and signed by the Deputy Director (Research) and Member Secretary.
16) Participation in the day-to-day affairs of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
17) To assist the Joint Commissioner and Vice-Chairman, Deputy Director and Member Secretary and Law Officer in day-to-day affairs and to comply with the directions and orders given by them from time to time.
Duties and Responsibilities of Research Officer (Vigilance Squad): (1) The Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukt Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Caste Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and rules made thereunder.
Page 22 of 14.
# Page 15
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
to act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003.
2) To act and control the cases received through eTribe Validity System.
3) To make planning under the guidance of Deputy Superintendent of Police to investigate the cases received from various offices.
4) To study the case investigated by the police vigilance team and ensure that a thorough investigation is carried out, otherwise the next case will be given to the investigation by determining the points of investigation.
5) In each case, the Vigilance team shall personally participate in the inquiry process with the Police Vigilance team, collect all the direct evidence (information, photos, statements, etc.) of the applicant's place of origin, customs, customs, traditions, social and cultural affinity, occupation, community surnames, zoning, etc. in the cases of the applicant and give their self-explanatory feedback after thoroughly studying them.
6) Ma. The Supreme Court and the Compilation of judgments of the High Court from time to time.
To assist the Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune in collecting information about the rare reference books, books and other documents of the Scheduled Tribes and collecting information about the concerned tribes along with documentary evidence.
8) Collect documentary evidence, if possible, on the basis of rare references and books of Scheduled Tribes and include it in the investigation case.
(9) To prepare the draft of the order within the prescribed time limit and submit it to the Deputy Director (Research) and the Member Secretary within the prescribed time limit for final approval in the case of closure for decision by the Member Secretary on the basis of the final decision of the Scrutiny Committee.
10) To assist the Deputy Superintendent of Police in the day-to-day affairs and to comply with the directions and orders given by him from time to time.
Duties and responsibilities of Research Officer (Academic, Appeal& Election, Grievance):
(1) To act and to be governed by the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukta Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Castes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and Rules thereunder, 2003.
(ii) To act as a member of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
Page 22 of 15.
# Page 16
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
(3) Conducting and controlling election/ education matters received through e-Tribe Validity System.
4) Checking the cases received by the login through eTribe Validity, voting in the case, preparing the order (valid/ invalid), checking and approving the order, uploading the order by the office, preparing the validity certificate and sending the validity certificate to the Deputy Director as a signatory through the Senior Research Officer.
5) To assist the Law Officer in judicial matters relating to educational, election, appeal and grievance matters in connection with the examination of the Tribal Certificate.
6) To file affidavits in the Supreme Court and High Court as required.
7) To collect information about rare reference books of the Scheduled Tribes and to use the information of the concerned tribes along with documentary evidence in the work of the committee and to facilitate the decision.
(8) To study the case submitted in the Scheduled Tribe certificate verification case and report the error to the concerned applicant, to complete it, to place the complete case before the committee for decision and to bring it to the notice of the concerned officers.
9) To prepare documentary evidence on the basis of rare references and books of Scheduled Tribes and include it in court cases.
10) To guide and assist the other research officers of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee in preparing the data of the tribe. To guide and assist the Research Officer working in the Vigilance team in the matter of investigation.
11) To conduct in-depth independent inquiry/ assist in the work of inquiry in the case of doubtful cases in connection with the verification of tribal certificate.
12) To send a show-cause notice (inquiry report) in the case of completion of the investigation by the Police Vigilance Team with the signature of the Deputy Director and the Member Secretary.
13) To schedule hearing of applicants in Scheduled Tribe certificate verification cases and to send the hearing letter with the signature of the Deputy Director and Member Secretary.
14) Prepare a detailed case history of each case before the hearing and keep it for the perusal of the committee.
15) Participation in the hearing of applicants in connection with the verification of the Scheduled Tribe certificate.
16) Controlling the activities related to preparation of invalid orders in cases closed for adjudication and issuing invalid orders within the time limit.
Page 22 of 16.
# Page 17
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
17) Participation in the day-to-day affairs of the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
(a) To act as an information officer under the Right to Information Act.
To assist the Joint Commissioner and Vice-Chairman, Deputy Director and Member Secretary and Law Officer in day-to-day affairs and to comply with the directions and orders given by them from time to time.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Manager:
1) To act as the Public Relations Officer of the Committee Office. Keeping a record in order to solve the doubts of the applicants coming to the committee office.
(ii) To make available to the Committee the matters to be heard and to prepare a schedule for the same.
Make available to the committee before the hearing.
3) Record the attendance of the applicants to the hearing.
4) After the hearing, the applicants shall make available on demand the certified copies of the order and order and keep a record of it.
5) Allotment of cases closed for adjudication after completion of hearing to the officers and tinkerers for preparation of orders.
6) To ensure that the copy of the order in the case decided by the committee reaches the concerned. (by mail, fax or email)
7) Keeping a record of the validity of the certificate issued by the Committee 8) Keeping the records of the cases closed by the Committee in order.
To file an affidavit in the court on behalf of the committee as required.
(10) To compile and preserve subject-wise laws and rules relating to the Committee, as well as judicial decisions, and to make them available to the Committee as and when required.
11) To ensure that the copy of the order in the case decided by the committee reaches the concerned
The manager will be fully responsible for the management, supervision and control of the records room. Continue to keep the records up to date. And also to take action for pest control and other materials from the point of view of preservation of archives.
13) To take action to prepare a monthly progress report of all the reports to be sent to the government.
To maintain coordination between the office, the police vigilance team and the committee members.
Page 22 of 17.
# Page 18
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
15) To inform all the concerned about the meetings held from time to time in accordance with the work of the Committee and to organize and prepare the minutes of the meetings. To demand compliance from the authorities concerned.
16) Keeping a record of all the books and reference books available in the office of the Committee. be made available as required. Keeping a record of the return and return of the above books/ reference books. to take care of them as needed
Monthly/ Yearly/ Book Reference Books and other Committee Useful
Proceeding to purchase written materials or audio-video.
17) Follow the directions given by the Joint Commissioner, Deputy Director, Law Officer, Senior Research Officer from time to time.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Police:
(1) To act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukta Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Regulation of Issue and Verification of Scheduled Tribes Certificate) Rules, 2003, made thereunder.
(ii) To complete in-depth investigation in at least 25 cases every month along with the Inspector of Police and to strictly follow the orders and directions given by him from time to time and to extend all possible cooperation to him during the entire investigation.
3) To submit to the Deputy Superintendent of Police for approval at the end of the month.
4) To assist the Deputy Superintendent of Police and the Inspector of Police in the day-to-day affairs and to comply with the directions and orders given by them from time to time.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Junior Administrative Officer:
(1) to act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Denotified Castes, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes Certificate (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003 framed thereunder.
(ii) to carry out the functions of the Committee in accordance with the structure and procedure of its office.
Page 22 of 18.
# Page 19
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
(3) To keep a regular check on the correspondence received in the office, record it office-wise and keep the same for the perusal of the Deputy Director and the Member Secretary and the Joint Commissioner.
(iv) To deal with the establishment matters of the office staff. Granting leave and keeping accounts, keeping service books updated, preparing transfer proposals, provident fund, preparing pension cases, fixing salaries, making establishment correspondence, annual internal repository verification.
5) To maintain daily, monthly, half-yearly and yearly accounts of Scheduled Tribes certificates and to prepare and submit reports to the Commissionerate and the Government.
6) Submission of information and compliance regarding Assembly starred/ unstarred questions, Lok Ayukta cases, etc.
7) To work as a public information officer. Monthly progress report of RTI and appeals to be submitted regularly.
8) To prepare quarterly reports on the establishment and submit them to the senior office.
Control of accounting activities (treasury operations, preparation and submission of payments to the treasury, monthly expenditure report, budget, budget, budget, audit of cash book, execution of procurement procedures, calling for tenders).
10) To submit to the approval of all the officers the possible tour and tour daily.
11) Keeping information updated, preparing information, following up on cases and preparing comments in line with the review meeting of the Scheduled Tribes Welfare Committee.
12) Preparation and submission of various meeting reports in a time-bound manner, preparation of compliance report on the history of the meeting.
13) To take all actions regarding confidential reports of officers and employees.
14) Maintenance and maintenance of all machinery in the heavy goods collection and office, and keeping in the register of the collection of the items related to its up-to-date record, taking action on the de-recording of the outdated heavy goods collection.
15) To perform the tasks assigned by the Joint Commissioner and superiors from time to time.
16) To prepare a monthly collection booklet by collecting information on all topics related to the committee.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Research Assistant:
The Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukt Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and its
Page 22 of 19.
# Page 20
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
To act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes Certification (Regulation of Issue and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003 framed thereunder.
2) Prepare a detailed case history of each case before the hearing, if necessary, and keep it for the perusal of the committee.
3) Controlling the cases, keeping the cases updated and detailing the cases as per the directions set by the government.
(iv) To assist the Law Officers and Senior Research Officers in judicial matters relating to academic, election, appeal and grievance matters in connection with the examination of the Tribal Certificate, if required.
5) Submission of Daily Progress Report (DPR) and Monthly Progress Report (MPR) to the senior office.
6) Submission of Monthly Progress Report (MPR) of court cases to the superior office.
(viii) To examine and bring to the notice of the superior, if necessary, new petitions received from the court, orders in judicial matters and other judicial, governmental and ancillary correspondence.
(8) to perform such other official functions as may be assigned to him by the Joint Commissioner and other senior officers.
Duties and responsibilities of the post of Research Assistant (Adi Praman System):
(1) To act in accordance with the provisions of the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Vimukta Jati, Nomadic Tribes and Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes (Regulation of Certification and Verification thereof) Act, 2000 (Maharashtra Act No. 23 of 2001) and the Maharashtra Scheduled Tribes (Regulation of Certification and Verification thereof) Rules, 2003, made thereunder.
2) Registering cases before 1st May, 2016 in DMU, handling DMU system, planning and execution of works accordingly and transfer to the Record Room.
3) To deal with cases received through eTribe Validity.
4) To solve the difficulties faced by the applicants applying on the' Proportion' system.
5) To make correspondence regarding the standard system etc. Stay in touch with Adi-Praman System Cell of Tribal Development Department, Mumbai and Tribal Research and Training Institute, Pune.
6) To handle the login and eTribe related matters of Joint Commissioner, Deputy Director, Law Officer, Senior Research Officer, Research Officer.
Page 22 of 20.
# Page 21
Government Resolution No: SANKIRN-3717/ PR No. 351/ KA.15
7) To examine the cases received through the Adi Parman system, to find out whether the cases of persons belonging to the lineage of the case holders were valid, invalid or how.
8) Record all the cases in the record room in the computer system and keep the records up to date.
9) Control over the operation of computerized registration of settled cases.
10) To perform other official duties assigned by the Joint Commissioner and other senior officers.
Duties and responsibilities of the post of Record Keeper:
1) To take full charge of the Record Room in the Scheduled Tribe Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
(ii) To preserve and maintain all the cases of the Screening Committee in the year-wise Record Room.
3) To make available to the Research Assistant (Adi' Praman' system) in the record room in time for recording in the computer system and to make the archive public in the record room after recording in the computer.
(iv) To provide case notices, withdraw notices and maintain up-to-date records as demanded by the officers/ members of the Committee, as required.
(5) In case of loss of any record/ case in the Record Room of the Scrutiny Committee, the entire responsibility shall be shared by the concerned Record Keeper and Joint Commissioner and Vice-Chairman, Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee.
(6) to perform other official functions assigned to him by the Joint Commissioner and other senior officers.
# Page 22