# Page 1
Implementation of the Mission for Facilitated Households and achieving holistic village prosperity by convergence of MGNREGS and various Departmental Schemes.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Planning (Rohyo Division)
Government Resolution No.MagroRo-2022/ No. 174/ ROHYO-6A
16th Floor, New Administration Building,
Madam Cama Road, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032
Date: 14th of December 2022.
Maharashtra Employment Guarantee Act, 1977 (with amendments of 2014)
3) Government Decisions, Planning Department (Rohyo Division), No. Magararohyo-2022/ Q.No.160/ Rohyo-7 dated 31st May, 2022.
The Proposal:
In the implementation of MGNREGA in the state, the objective of MGNREGA in various systems is understood as' work for demand' and then work is not given because people do not demand work. The objectives of the MGNREGA Act, 2005 of the Government of India have been clear from the beginning to improve the livelihood status and the provisions in the Maharashtra State Employment Guarantee Scheme (Amendment) Act, 2014 are as follows:
The main objectives of the scheme are:
(1) To provide unskilled manual work in rural areas on demand as a guarantee of employment to every household for a period not less than the period specified in the Schedule to the Central Act. This will result in sustainable production of prescribed quality inputs; (2) Strengthening the livelihood support of the poor; (3) Actively ensuring social inclusion.
Strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions:
The aforesaid objectives shall apply when adult members are voluntarily engaged to perform unskilled manual work subject to the conditions laid down by or under this Act and the Scheme.
and
according to Section 5. The State Government will take concrete steps for effective implementation of the inter-departmental convergence to the last mile to achieve the results from the works under ROHYO scheme along with other Government schemes or programmes. So that there is coherence and inclusiveness in planning, quality inputs are generated and productivity is improved so that multiple dimensions of poverty can be tackled in a sustainable manner.
Further, as per Schedule I 3 (b) of the MGNREGA Act, 2005 of the Government of India, the core objective of the scheme is" to strengthen the livelihood resource base of the poor." Therefore, adults need to produce quality, sustainable productive energy while performing unskilled manual labor.
# Page 2
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
While the focus is on public drugs under ROHO, under MGNREGA, at least 60 per cent of the expenditure has to be on individual drugs. Increasing productivity by producing quality sustainable productive inputs will increase production, income and net profit and strengthen their livelihood base. It will enable sustainable overcoming of various dimensions of poverty deprivation. The ultimate goal of all the departments of the state is to make the citizens of the state happy, satisfied and prosperous. Its fundamental stage is to overcome the dimensions of poverty of citizens. For this, it is clear that all the departments of the state have to actively converge their schemes with the schemes of MNREGA.
A perusal of the above clauses of the Act also reveals that MGNREGA is not just a law for employment generation but is also to be used for increasing productivity and alternatively income generation through quality inputs. Therefore, the MNREGA Act is not just' work for those who ask'. The approach thus formulated has been termed by the Government as' MGNREGA- Reformed Approach'.
Now NITI Aayog has defined poverty as a multidimensional index based on deprivation.
It is possible that different departments of the government know or know which family is deprived on what dimension. The aim is to end the deprivation of the citizens of the state by all the departments of the government. Therefore, in the future, MNREGA will be a scheme of' work for the poor' instead of' work for the poor'. In the coming period, instead of asking for work, the departments should reach out to the families on their own to survey the deprivation and involve them in ending their deprivation. Every family in the state has to be made confident that they themselves are capable of solving their problems. In this way, every department has to be actively involved in bringing every family into the mainstream of society (social inclusion).
Provision of funds: The availability of funds under MGNREGA is as per the demand. Since the objective of the law is to overcome deprivation, the state aims to provide 100 days of employment every year to the underprivileged families in the state. According to the Multidimensional Poverty Index, 14.9 per cent of families in the state are deprived. There are 36 lakh families in the state. Therefore, the state should generate at least 36 crore man-days every year. This amount will be available every year to reduce poverty in the state. Of this, 90% i.e. 13,824 crore will be from the Central Government. However, MGNREGA is also applicable to families with five acres of landholding. There are many such families.
The state government has made a provision of commercial tax in the ROHA Act for the availability of funds.
Last year, the state's tax revenue was Rs 2,500 crore. If this entire fund is to be used for MNREGA, then 10 times of this, i. e., 25 thousand crore rupees, is available for works under MNREGA.
Last year, the state had spent Rs 2,500 crore under MGNREGA. If we look at various aspects of the law, there is abundant fund available to eliminate the deprivation of the families of the state and to increase the accessibility of the facilities.
Meaning of convergence: Convergence generally means convergence of MGNREGA funds and funds of various departments. But from the point of view of family and village prosperity, its meaning is broader. This is reflected in the following analysis.
Page 2 of 32
# Page 3
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
Every department has come into existence to make the citizens of the state happy, satisfied and prosperous and to maintain continuity in it. The departments have been given the responsibility of implementing each of the tasks by dividing the work to be done to achieve this goal. It is expected that the above end goal will be achieved if all the departments work on their own.
All the departments have prepared their plans for the implementation of the works. These plans have been made available in the budget. If the budget is limited, it is not possible to reach 100 percent of the needy people in the state. Sometimes there are no plans because of budget constraints. So sometimes the budget is made available from more than one source for the approved plan.
At present, funds are available mainly from the State/ District (DPC)/ Project level/ Taluk level budget. Even after years of implementation of all these funds, 14.9 per cent of the people in the state are deprived as per the Multidimensional Poverty Index.
The funds available under MGNREGA are available at the Gram Sabha level. This fund is available to remove the deprivation of the people. The availability of this fund is as per the demand. It is possible to plan and implement 100 percent household deprivation plan to eliminate deprivation and availability as per demand.
Therefore, all the departments have an additional budget in the name of MGNREGA for the implementation of the works that come to them, which is obtained with the approval of the Gram Sabha.
However, 263 types of works are permissible under MNREGA. At the district level, the ratio of 60:40 has to be maintained. If 90% of the Government of India funds are to be used, the limit of 100 days of wages per year per job card has to be followed.
Following the above conditions, all the departments of the state can use the above funds available at the village level to achieve their goals. Because of the availability of these funds, some departments can achieve even 10 times the results they are currently achieving. Some sections will never be able to (e.g. Schools can do this work.
So, when there is clarity of the objective attainment, there can be many forms of convergence in terms of financial availability. Below are four of them:
1) Think about your goals and money.
2. The department should link its schemes to generate income from the liquor sold under MNREGA.
For example: a well under MNREGA, a solar pump/ drip/ fountain machine under the scheme of Tribal Department/ Social Justice and Special Assistance Department/ Other Backward and Bahujan Welfare Department/ Energy Department.
3. Well under MGNREGA and orchard under MGNREGA.
Convergence from the pooling of your and MGNREGA funds, especially to maintain the ratio of 60:40.
Convergence of Manpower: The Construction Department is available for the construction of all departments in the state.
Engineers of all departments are available for MNREGA work. Also, they are appointed on contract basis under MGNREGA.
Page 3 of 32
# Page 4
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
Engineers are also available. MGNREGA is more useful in this sense for those departments where technical manpower is not available.
MGNREGA has engineers hired on contract basis who can prepare the budget of a given design, give technical approval to it. The construction site can provide the technical control of the construction, MB recording and OC.
2. The design of the construction should be provided by the people of the department.
3. Define the criteria for beneficiaries. Encourage the beneficiaries and impart training in the proper use of the generated matha so that the beneficiaries can overcome their deprivation and prosper.
Dimensions of Poverty.
NITI Aayog has released the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) 2021. It takes into account the severity of poverty and the number and percentage of households living in poverty by weighting, calculating and applying a cut-off for each criterion, taking into account all the criteria together if the households are deprived of health, education and living standards. The criteria of deprivation, their weight and areas are given in Annexure-I, the departments directly responsible for overcoming various deprivations in Annexure-II, the percentage of multidimensional poverty per district, its intensity and its analysis in Annexure-III and the district-wise index determined on this basis in Annexure-IV.
Overcoming the Dimension of Poverty Deprivation
At least one department is working to solve every problem of the citizens of the state. The department also has a plan and budget for this. However, in every scheme, some contribution is also expected from the concerned family. At times, the family falls short of its contribution due to various reasons. After that, the plan does not yield the desired results. The decline in the family's contribution can also be attributed to other dimensions of poverty.
The departments working to overcome poverty deprivation in rural areas are generally divided into three types:
1. Department of Basic Needs- It includes the departments of Women and Child Development and School Education.
2. Household income generating sectors- This includes agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries.
3. Departments for the upliftment of various sections of the society- This includes Social Justice and Special Assistance Department, Tribal Development Department and Other Backward Bahujan Welfare Department.
Since it is the primary duty of the government to provide basic needs to the citizens, it is appropriate to start the work of overcoming poverty from there.
the Department of Basic Needs
Department of Women and Child Development: Disadvantage Criteria No. 1.1 The Department of Women and Child Development is working to tackle malnutrition in the family. 31.7 percent of the state's total 14.9 percent poverty, 4 out of 32
# Page 5
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
This is due to malnutrition. The scheme is meant for children and adolescent girls in the age group of 0-6 years and pregnant and lactating mothers. The Tribal Development Department has a loan scheme for the tribal community.
Similarly, free ration is being provided to 80 crore families of the country since the advent of Covid-19. However, the prevalence of malnutrition among women and children has not been reduced.
The Department of Women and Child Development provides supplementary nutrition to children and women. The main nutrition is to be obtained by the family itself. When food is available, it should be consumed in a healthy/ balanced manner with a certain frequency. Any food should be tasty if it is to be consumed frequently. Knowledge of healthy/ balanced/ tasty food is provided by Anganwadi workers/ ASHAs/ ANMs. You will also get some information from the society. In today's digital era, a lot of information is obtained from YouTube videos and WhatsApp in mobile. In order to create a healthy, balanced and tasty diet, the family must have access to smartphones for information on the consumption of abundant and varied food/ pulses/ fruits/ vegetables/ eggs/ meat and the specific manner in which they are consumed. These are not included in the scheme of the Department of Women and Child Development. Families are expected to make the above available themselves
They have to be prepared/ cooked in order to consume a healthy/ balanced/ varied/ tasty abundant diet. Cooking is done only by women. And they have a lot of other work to do. For a variety of cooking, and in order to reduce the time required for it, tools such as a pot, cooking gas, pressure cooker and mixer are needed. A fridge is also required to cook food for 2-3 days. Knowledge is required to manage all these aspects. It can be accessed from mobile with a data pack.
From the above analysis it is clear that in order to eliminate malnutrition in the family, the following contribution from the family is required.
1.Eating a healthy, balanced, varied and nutritious diet. 2. cooking gas. 3. the pressure cooker. Mixer 4.
Time to cook. 6. knowledge of cooking. Mobile with datapack to provide knowledge.
8. Electricity for the electrically operated machines.
For the above-mentioned items (excluding Nos. 5 and 6- but this will be possible through the proper use of the listed machines), the adult members of the family concerned can work under MNREGA and get wages. You can also increase the productivity, production, income and net profit of the farm by cultivating buttermilk in your field/ land. You can increase your income. In the revised vision of MGNREGA, the concerned family is expected to increase their income by taking advantage of MGNREGA for this. In this way, by increasing the income, the family members should be provided with nutritious/ balanced/ varied/ tasty abundant food so that the malnutrition in the family is removed and the family comes out of the poverty.
It has been observed that starting the work with malnourished children from the level of MAM (Moderately Acute Malnutrition) gives more results as compared to the level of SAM (Severely Acute Malnutrition). However, if there is a shortage of the above 8 facilities from the family for attention from the MAM level, then there is no separate scheme/ fund (budget) available with the Department of Women and Child Development.
In such a situation, to fulfill the above 8 facilities, families should be encouraged to take up MNREGA work and generate income by generating quality sustainable productive output through MNREGA.
Page 32 of 5
# Page 6
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
It has to be increased. This work of MGNREGA is to be done by the Department of Women and Child Development to achieve the goal of eradication of malnutrition of our department. Along with this, the family also has to use the income from this work of MNREGA to remove malnutrition in their family members. It would be a failure on the part of all of us to use the income received for reasons other than malnutrition. Therefore, there will be a need for detailed discussions with parents about the long-term impact of malnutrition on children's lives. If this discussion can be convincing then people will use the income received from MNREGA only and only for the family' s malnutrition relief. In this way, if malnutrition ends in the family, then the feeling that I have succeeded in ending malnutrition will also be created in the mind of that family. Such a feeling will be very useful for that family because it will have developed the belief that' I can overcome' any difficulty in the future. It is also called social inclusion.
Out of the above 8 items, the details of how many days of MGNREGA wages will be required for each of the items that can be purchased with money is given in Annexure-5.
Department of School Education 2.
There are two deprivations associated with this section- 2.1 (entire family being illiterate) and 2.2 (any child in the family below the age of 14 years being out of school). The deprivation of 18.5 per cent of the 14.9 per cent deprived citizens of the state is due to these two dimensions.
All the members of some families in the state are still illiterate. The government plans to run adult literacy classes online for the education of these people. For this, every illiterate must have his own smartphone. It's not part of the government's agenda. It has to be done by the family.
The school education department has opened schools for 100 per cent children of school age. 100% of the state's children under the age of 14 are expected to be in school, attend and learn regularly. Some children are still out of school.
The state of Maharashtra has set a target that' no child should be left out'. Some children have also been surveyed if they are not on board. The Government is committed to provide quality education to the out of school/ irregular children identified in the survey by regularizing them in schools.
While making the children regular it is necessary to speculate on the reasons of their irregularity. Poverty of parents, parents engaging their children in their livelihood activities are some of the reasons that are likely to come immediately in the minds of some people.
Let's think about this in detail. When the Government of India launched the Mid-Day Meal Scheme in 1992, it had two objectives: to increase the size of the school and to increase the attendance of children. Lunch is provided in all schools. If the parents of the children (other than children of working age) are poor, it will be difficult for them to get food at home and therefore the children of these poor families should attend school for mid-day meals. But the irregular children are not from very rich families. Otherwise, the children continued to be regular, even in need of midday meals
Page 32 of 6.
# Page 7
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
Of course, these children cannot be regularized in school by giving them mid-day meals. After that, what else is there to do?
To understand it, it is necessary to understand the reasons for the regularity of children. Regular residents include children from both rich and poor families. This shows that there are other factors beyond parental poverty that need to be taken into account when considering whether children are regular or irregular.
So what would be the reason? The love of school for children. Why do some children love school and others don't? This is because children learn faster and faster.
If some of the topics are left to be taught while the children are regular in school and the rest of the children move forward in learning, then the children will start to find it difficult to understand the topics in the class. Over time, the same thing will remove the sweetness of the school, and the children will become irregular. Once children become irregular, they will fall further behind in comparison to the class. After that, it will be difficult for the children to go to school. Most of the teachers find it very difficult to bring such backward children to the level of classes.
So what's the solution? There are two important things that have happened over the past few years. One of these is the strengthening of social media in recent years, and the lockdown due to COVID-19 has made people use social media.
Most of the teachers have also conducted online classes during the lockdown. Many parents, teachers and students have been complaining about the lack of mobile phones while conducting online classes. During the same lockdown, many teachers have realized that smartphones are being used for children's self-education and beyond textbook learning beyond online education. Even though the lockdown is over today, many teachers have realized that smartphones are very useful in keeping them with the class in quality education. It is well known that the New Education Policy calls for imparting 21st century skills as well as world-class predictive education to children.
Recently, the Deputy Chief Minister has highlighted this while conveying his best wishes to the teachers of the Ashram School for the training of the teachers of the denotified and nomadic tribes. The education department is also planning training programmes covering these issues.
Every parent should have a smartphone for their child. But if some parents do not have the financial means to buy such mobiles, the idea is to get teachers to help them get such mobiles by planning activities under MGNREGA as it is essential for the quality of their children's education.
Health: Health is a basic human need. At present, direct convergence of schemes of the health department and MNREGA is not being considered as nutrition and education will be used to eliminate deprivation related to primary health. However, the officers and staff of this department will be involved in the adoption of Nandadeep villages.
Page 7 of 32
# Page 8
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
Department of Agriculture India has been working towards doubling farmers' income for the last few years. For this purpose, the department should plan for MNREGA and get additional funds. It is also noticed that farmers with very low income may be trapped in deprivation even after doubling their income. So, the department should work under MNREGA with the aim of increasing the income of every farmer to at least Rs 1 lakh.
2. Animal Husbandry Department Under MANREGA, a bullock cart can be constructed and various arrangements can be made for fodder. Small land-owning families are unable to earn much income from agriculture. But if the skill of animal husbandry is developed by tying a bullock cart on the same place, then those families can get rid of deprivation. With proper guidance to the farmers, the risk of getting into debt can be reduced by developing linkages to agriculture. Similarly, if the number of cattle increases in the state, the availability of cow dung will increase. This will help in maintaining the soil texture by increasing the decreasing organic matter in the soil of the state.
3. The Department of Fisheries is currently implementing the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana. Implementing the idea of' farm where there are fish ponds', this department can help in eliminating the deprivation of 100 landholders in areas with good rainfall. In the next period, the department should implement a large-scale farm plan under MNREGA. Also, they should be given proper training on the process of fish farming and its risks.
The Department of Tribal Development is to develop all the tribal families and tribal villages in the state.
Under MGNREGA, tribal families have been given first priority. The department is to use the income generating activities of the departments through MNREGA to overcome the deprivation of tribal families by providing basic needs to them in the beginning and to enrich all tribal families in the later stages.
The Social Justice and Special Assistance Department is to develop all the Scheduled Caste families and Scheduled Caste-dominated habitations in the state. Under MGNREGA, families belonging to the Scheduled Castes are given second priority.
The Department is to use the income generating activities of the Departments through MGNREGA to overcome the deprivation of the SC families by providing them with basic necessities in the beginning and to enrich all SC families in the later stages. Apart from this, this department is also to fully utilize the MGNREGA funds for the development of the disadvantaged sections of the society (for example, Divyang).
The Other Backward Classes and Bahujan Welfare Department is to develop all the Vimukta and Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes families as well as Vimukta and Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes dominated Wadi/ Tanda/ Wasti and villages in the state. The Department is to use the income generating activities of the Departments through MNREGA to overcome the deprivation of the families belonging to the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Classes by providing them with basic necessities in the beginning and enriching them in the later stages.
Page 32 of 8.
# Page 9
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
4. Minority Development Department The Minority Development Department has to develop all types of minority families as well as minority dominated villages and hamlets in the state. The department is to use the initiatives of the income generating departments through MGNREGA to overcome the deprivation of the minority families by providing them with basic necessities in the beginning and enriching them in the later stages.
A brief description is given in Section 2.
The management of natural resources
(Increase productivity, production, income and net profit)
1.1 WATER USE MANAGEMENT A. Checking the water content (salts/ acids).
B. Use of water to moisten the roots of crops.
1. Efficient use of water (drip/ dew) 2. Increase productivity by following the above.
Improving Living Conditions Increasing Climate Productivity Increasing Productivity Risk Management
in the market
the management of risk
Increase in income
Reducing the input cost.
Reducing climate risks and management costs.
Reducing market risks as well as the cost of obtaining the right price.
Improvement in standard of living Net increase in profit
1.2. Soil Management A. Reduction/ stoppage of erosion.
B. soil testing.
(c) Maintenance/ improvement of soil texture.
Page 9 of 32
# Page 10
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
1. Increase in production 1. Choose crops which give more yield as per the availability of water.
2. Choose the crop which gives more yield according to the type of soil.
Reducing climate risks.
2. Increase in income 1. Choose crops which give more income (per drop more money) according to the availability of water.
2. Choose crops that give more money per particle of soil.
3. Agricultural produce to be sold at fair price (godown/ cold storage/ onion farm/ water street market etc.).
Increase in net profit and reduce input costs.
Use of plant based pesticides c. Use of organic fertilizers by reducing chemical fertilizers in a phased manner
Management of water supply:
(a) Lack of water supply:
(i) To increase the irrigated area and improve the living conditions by increasing the availability of ground water.
Catch the rain when it falls, where it falls.
(iii) Water to each farm with the consideration of: (i) Well (with bund and chars) (ii) Farms (with bund and chars) (iii) Watershed development taking into account the farm of each land holder. But if the traditional method of irrigation is used, more land will not be irrigated.
But irrigation will be available if new knowledge is used as follows.
Water for agriculture is not water for irrigation. This idea of irrigation reduces the productivity. But the real irrigation is to provide moisture to the roots of the crops.
Drip is the best irrigation for more productivity, not just a drip for saving water.
It is not suitable from the point of view of water utilization as watering the crop under the Tushar irrigation. However in some crops drip irrigation has to be used because the distance between the two plants is less and drip irrigation becomes more expensive.
(iv) Liquid irrigation provides water to the soil. This irrigation is not appropriate from the point of view of water use, not appropriate from the point of view of crop production. It is also harmful to the soil (the soil becomes alkaline, friable).
(b) We do not want to spoil our lives and the lives of our descendants because water is abundant.
About 40 tonnes of sugarcane is produced per hectare. However, if irrigated with the above approach, 120 tonnes of sugarcane is produced in one acre of farm.
Augmenting Water Availability: (a) At present, 30-40% of rainwater flows into Marathwada and West Vidarbha.
East Vidarbha normally receives 60 per cent of its annual rainfall.
Page 32 of 10.
# Page 11
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
90% of the rainwater flows into the Konkan.
They can increase the availability of water by reducing the amount of rainwater runoff by making farmlands (including bunds and chars) in the terrestrial system and digging wells (including bunds and chars) in the terrestrial system.
(b) By bringing more area under each drop of water, the availability of water will also increase in a sense (drip/ frost irrigation) by stopping the flow of irrigation.
(c) Increase in productivity of every part of the land will also increase the availability of water in a sense. For this, the soil needs to be moistened. Soil organic matter needs to be taken care of.
d) If groundwater is used, water availability will be increased in a sense by increasing the productivity of each drop by testing the water.
Soil Management: Increasing the availability of soil.
(a) The soil quality in the country has deteriorated. Soil is tested by the government on 9 factors. Organic carb is the most important of these elements. At present, Maharashtra has 0.3 to 0.4 per cent organic matter in its soil. According to the soil science, in such a situation, the productivity of that land is 30 to 40 percent. If we want to take that productivity to 100 percent, we have to take the organic curb to one percent. Of course, by increasing the organic carbon of the soil, one means increasing the availability of land.
(b) To increase the availability of land in a sense by bringing down the double/ double irrigation of more land.
(c) To increase the availability of land in a sense by increasing the productivity of that land by providing protected irrigation to more areas.
d) To increase the availability of land in a sense by multilayer farming.
3. Increase availability of cow dung.
More animals will be needed. There is a lot of demand for wheat given by MGNREGA. Along with this, guidance for proper care will increase animal husbandry to a great extent.
Animal husbandry is not economically viable if it is done only for dung.
Therefore, there is a need to work more thoughtfully for- a) Dairy Business b) Sheep/ Goat Meat Business than what is being thought at present.
See also Appendix 4
Identifying the need for planning and implementation
The Prime Minister in his Independence Day speech on Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav has put forward the vision that India should be a developed nation in the next 25 years. In developed countries every adult should have his own car. NITI Aayog has defined multidimensional poverty as three dimensions- health, education and standard of living. The family owning a car is included in the dimension of ownership in the concept of living.
Page 32 of 11.
# Page 12
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
After becoming a developed nation every adult in the country is expected to be a carpenter. As we move forward, the following steps are expected. The planning and implementation of MGNREGA should help the people of the state to achieve the same milestones.
Facilitation Phase 1: This phase is expected to prioritize the health dimension of deprivation of poverty. Appendix No. If only malnutrition could be eliminated in the state as seen in Figure 1, poverty would be eliminated in 32 percent of the families.
After the Covid period, about 80 crore people in the country are being given free ration. There's not enough food. It is not malnutrition, but the lack of a healthy/ balanced diet, a varied and tasty diet. This will require the availability of cookers, mixers and cooking gas mentioned in the living element to ensure the availability of abundant and diverse food and to prepare a diverse diet in the shortest time available to women living in poverty. In the first phase of the MGNREGA scheme, MGNREGA activities should be planned and implemented to ensure that these facilities are available to the malnourished families.
People of this stage will have to work as labourers in flour production or public works.
Phase 2: The refrigerator is required to ensure that the tasty and varied dishes can be used for three to four days once they are ready. Also, you will need a mobile with a datapack to get more information about recipe dietetics, balanced diet.
Mobile will help in achieving both adult literacy and quality education. He will also have regular attendance of children of school-going age. If both the dimensions of malnutrition in health and education can be overcome, it will help reduce 50 percent poverty in the state.
According to NITI Aayog, both refrigerators and phones (mobiles) are also registered in the possession of habitual drinkers.
If no person in the family is malnourished but there is an adult illiterate in the family or there are children studying up to class VIII and the family does not have a mobile phone and refrigerator, then the second phase of MGNREGA should be planned and implemented for that family. People of this level will have to work as laborers in flour production or public works.
Phase 3: In this phase of planning and implementation of MGNREGA, Phase 1 and Phase 2 should be planned for all the beneficiary households who do not own a motorbike. This is the stage that leads the family to the lakhpati. For people of this level, the work of making buttermilk will have to be done.
Lakhpati/ Karpati Phase 4: People of this level will live as citizens of a developed country. For people of this level, work will have to be taken in the form of a package of drugs.
Setting priorities for various tasks:
1. Setting priorities for public works: 1.1 To make Anganwadis well-equipped and equipped.
1.2 To make the school comfortable and well equipped.
1.3 Desilting of ponds/ dams, deepening/ tunnelling of drains which will provide additional water to the farm.
Page 32 of 12.
# Page 13
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
1.4. Setting up of godowns/ chawls/ cold storages so as to sell farm produce at reasonable prices.
1.5 Development of watersheds with the aim of providing water to every farm
1.6 Waterlogged roads to facilitate timely sowing, harvesting and harvesting of farm produce.
2. Prioritization of community works: 2.1 Godown/ Cold Storage
2.2 Farms
2.3 Community Irrigation Well
2.4 A group of animals
2.5 NADAP/ COMPOST STRUCTURE
2.6 Planting
2.7 Saving House
Prioritization of individual work: 3.1.
3.2 Absorbents
3.3 NADAP, Vermi Compost Structure
3.4.Fruit orchards, floriculture, bund tree plantation, sericulture.
The 3.5 farm.
3.6 Cow shed, goat shed, poultry shed.
Beneficiary Priority
People from all walks of life living in poverty (deprived of health, education and livelihood).
It should be clear to everyone that each of the above is aimed at increasing the family income.
A book is being published by the department on the success story of MNREGA. In it, the impact of each of the above works on the income of the people has been clearly brought out. By studying it, a comparative study can be done on how much income will increase if any work is given to any family under MNREGA. It should be taken into account that the planned work of MNREGA will enable the family to reach the milestone of the facility according to the current situation. It is our goal that through the planning of works and their speedy and quality implementation, they should reach the desired stage of family facilitation. Every family needs to be educated. For this, the concerned department should prepare a separate note on the economics of each work.
Government Decisions: All the above considerations, family and village-wise planning, responsibilities to be performed by various departments in all these matters, persons responsible for planning at the village level as well as department-wise persons responsible for their capacity building, stages of implementation, development of Nandadeep villages and taluks, details for coordination between MGNREGA and the works of various departments and employees (for example, Education Department) are being explained as follows.
Page 32 of 13
# Page 14
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
Planning at village level 1. All departments should plan MGNREGA works for their respective work related families. This will increase the income of the family. So that it will be possible to end the deprivation associated with each segment in the case of that family.
The families concerned are to be provided employment through MGNREGA for personal, community or public welfare until the deprivation related to health, education or livelihood is removed.
A great deal of emphasis is placed on personal development. There are two reasons for this: 2.1 The Government of India has set a target of covering at least 60% of the expenditure under MGNREGA on individual activities.
2.2 Personal income generates income for the family. Thus, by creating a sustainable source of income for the family, it paves the way for a permanent exit from poverty in the future.
However, many families do not have access to land or are only able to profit from doing some business collectively. In such a situation, community awareness should be created. There has been no such development in the state so far. This needs to be done carefully and carefully. A large number of Self Help Groups (SHGs) have been formed in the state through MSRLM. Also, many Farmers Producers Companies and Farmers Producers Organizations have been formed by the Agriculture Department. All of this should be used to reduce poverty.
Public infrastructure such as roads, godowns are required to generate income from any individual, collective or public goods. It also needs to be planned. People are not eager to work in public works in this state. Because wages are lower than market prices. In such a situation, it is necessary to make people understand the importance of public opinion. Also, the funds of the state government should be used as per the need by using the machinery for such works.
3. Families belonging to various departments 1. Department of Women and Child Development 1. Families with malnourished children.
b) Families with malnourished women.
(c) Pregnant and lactating mothers.
2. School Education Department: (a) Families with out of school or out of school children up to the age of 14 years.
b) Families where 100% of the population is illiterate above the age of 10 years.
Tribal Development Department: All families belonging to Scheduled Tribes.
Department of Social Justice: All families belonging to Scheduled Castes.
Other Backward Classes: VJNT, OBC and SBC families.
Fisheries Department: Landholding families in areas with good rainfall.
7. Animal Husbandry Department: Landholding and landless families with basic knowledge of animal husbandry.
Page 32 of 14.
# Page 15
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
8. Department of Agriculture: All landholding families irrespective of the rainfall of the land 9. Department of Rural Development: All families in rural areas.
Soil and Water Conservation Department: Landholding families without irrigation system.
11. Revenue Department: All landless households for the purpose of producing buttermilk.
Skill Development Department: Families with more than 100 days of work in a year 13. Department of Higher and Technical Education: Families with more than 12th standard education but falling in any deprivation as per MPI.
MNREGA: All landless, small and marginal landholding families in the village.
15.Water Resources Department: Families having irrigated agricultural land but are in some form of deprivation.
16.Planning Department: Villages where there is lack of storage facility for the agricultural produce produced in the village.
4. Person responsible for planning at village level: 1. Gram sabha means village, sarpanch, panchayat member.
(2) Rural employment.
3) Group resource person (MSRLM CRP). Maharashtra State Rural Livelihood Mission 4) Anganwadi worker.
(b) A teacher in the district school.
6) Teachers in Ashram Schools of Tribal, Social Justice and Other Backward and Bahujan Welfare Departments, if they are in the village.
(7) The villagers.
8).
9) ANM in the sub-station if the headquarters is in the village.
(a) Agricultural Assistant.
Person responsible for capacity building of employees at village level: 1. Extension Officer, Panchayat.
APO and Technical Assistant (MGNREGA).
3) Supervisor of Anganwadi.
4) Deputy Commissioner.
(a) The Director of Agriculture.
Head of Centre (Education).
People at this level should be present at the time of planning at the village level till the capacity building of the village level staff/ people is done.
Implementation phases: 1) Phase-1: (to be implemented in next 2 months) 1.1 100% household survey based on health and education deprivation.
1.2 To determine the number and names of villages to be adopted by 50 officers and staff each, who are self-motivated and doing excellent work in each department, without expecting any additional financial benefit. These villages will be called Nandadeep villages.
1.3 Some Talukas will also be selected as Nandadeep Talukas with the approval of the Government.
Phase 2 (to be implemented within 6 months)
Page 32 of 15.
# Page 16
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
2.1 100% of households with some other need based on deprivation of health and education.
2.2 According to Rogers Curve of Humanistic Theory, 2.5 percent of human beings in every human community are innovators. Accordingly, the number and names of villages to be adopted by the 2.5 per cent officers and staff who are self-motivated and excellent in every department.
3.1 In the next 2 months, about 300 villages will be selected as Nandadeep villages.
3.2 About 5,000 villages will be selected as Nandadeep in the next 6 months.
3.3 According to the Rogers Curve of humanistic theory, the next 13.5 percent of people who see innovators succeed are willing to work in the same way to succeed. They are called early adopters. The total number of officers/ employees in the state is so much that their 16 percent (2.5+ 13.5) will be more than 44,000.
Therefore, in this way, in about 5 years, 100 percent (44,000) villages of the state will become Nandadeep villages.
Capacity building and training of staff and officers: (i) Training given earlier: (ii) Completion of 3 days training of all 3,000 staff engaged through external agencies.
Training of 26,600 Gram Rozgar Sevaks in the State has been completed.
2) Training planned in the following period: a) Training of CRP, Bank Sakhi, Pashu Sakhi, Krishi Sakhi (about 30,000) working under MSRLM.
Training of all the employees/ officers (about 20,000) from village to taluka level working under the Department of Agriculture.
3) Point No. 3 days training will be given to all the staff/ officers of 5th and 6th.
8. Shortage of manpower and misuse of MSRLM cadre: Our country has one government servant for every 24,000 population, compared to one for every 131 in the UK (Source: Rohini Nalkeni, The Times of India). Article 11.10.2022) In such a situation, the task of planning for the elimination of deprivation of 100 percent families and the prosperity of 100 percent families in selected villages may be difficult. Therefore, it will be appropriate for all government departments to make use of the trained cadre of about 30,000 people of MSRLM.
By doing this, the families of the self-help groups as well as the self-help groups will get the benefit of the MNREGA scheme to a greater extent.
Similarly, it would be appropriate to leverage the benefit of both the groups of farmers (farmers and the government).
9. Functions to be carried out through MNREGA: (i) All the works to be carried out jointly by the people of different departments should be included in the Samriddhi Budget.
(2) All such works shall be approved by the Gram Sabha.
Page 32 of 16.
# Page 17
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
3) To see whether all the works together fit in the ratio of 60:40 at the Gram Panchayat level. Do more work if you don't have a job.
4) To issue more job cards so that more than 100 man-days per job card are not generated during the implementation of all the works planned in the Gram Panchayat. Also, youth above 18 years of age should be given a separate job card if they demand.
5) To complete 100 man-days of work on each job card every year. More work needs to be done next year.
6) The work of issuing additional/ demand-based job cards will be completed through the MNREGA mechanism in the Panchayat Samiti.
7) If the work is to be done by the Panchayat system, the technical and administrative approval will be given by the Technical Assistant and Block Development Officer respectively in the Panchayat system.
8) Similarly, if the planned work is to be executed by any other department, the concerned department will give administrative approval to it. Also, the technical assistant appointed for the concerned Gram Panchayat will give technical approval to it.
9) The CDEO in the Tehsil Office will do the work of removing the muster of the work of the departments other than the Panchayat. However, if the volume of work executed by a department increases, that department will be given a separate CDEO.
10) Monthly progress reports of implementation will be made available department-wise as per the work code of the planned work.
11) Problems arising in the implementation of the work planned by the department will be resolved from time to time.
Responsibilities of various departments: 1) Participation in village level planning.
2) Keeping up-to-date information on family planning related to your department.
3) Implement and follow the plan.
4) To take care that the tasks planned by the department fit in the ratio of 60:40.
Creating additional skills as needed. If this is not possible, the District Planning Committee (DPC) or the department should provide additional funds.
5) Motivating the planned family to participate in MNREGA.
Separating job cards as per requirement so that the planned tasks for the family are completed within 100 days per job card, as well as providing additional job cards to youth above 18 years of age.
7) Ensure that the work assigned by the department is completed on time. Also, make sure that no transaction is rejected.
Establishment of Mission PMU (Project Management Unit): While working in this way, there will be a tremendous increase in the work of control and coordination. A PMU will be set up at the mission level to ensure smooth functioning of all these functions. There may be a need to set up a separate mission office in 5,000 villages in the state when the work of Nandadeep village begins. If successful, this mission will be needed until all 44,000 villages are prosperous.
On page 32 of 17
# Page 18
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
12. While working for 100 per cent households, the work profile of the departments will change. A few of them are mentioned here.
1) Animal Husbandry Department: Giving cowshed through MNREGA makes it possible to take care of cleanliness. Along with this, if proper training is given in animal husbandry, then the death rate of the goats decreases and their number increases rapidly. Therefore, the main task of the department in convergence with MGNREGA will be training and vaccination. The current group allocation works are limited by the budget availability. There is no limit on the budget. Only if the ratio is 60:40, it can reach 100 per cent of the family.
2. Department of Agriculture: At present, the work of natural resource management is expected to be done by the Department of Agriculture. The funds for this are available under the MNREGA. It is the need of the hour to do it on 100 percent land and private farms. However, due to lack of clarity in the rules of business of the Agriculture Department, the work has not been expedited.
3) Department of Fisheries Conservation: A large number of farmlands are going to be constructed while carrying out the work of NRM under MNREGA. In some of these farms, fish will have to be reared according to need.
All the farmers will be provided training and guidance.
4) Revenue Department: In rural areas, it is essential to provide support to landless agricultural labor families to bring them out of poverty. It requires availability of land. There are not many gairans, gaothans or government sites available to provide land to such families. Also, if these poor families are unable to buy land, MNREGA will provide them with a 30-year lease on which they can buy land. However, there is no provision in the law for this. A model contract will also be drawn up.
5) Marketing Department: At present, only 40 percent of the agricultural produce in the state has a godown/ chandelier. Godown is a permissible work in MANREGA. It is necessary for the department to spread the information about the need of the godowns as well as their management.
Acceleration in learning: In the last 8-10 years, there has been an increase in Google, YouTube, WhatsApp, Zoom, Google Meet, Twitter, etc. In the last two-and-a-half years, due to the lockdown due to COVID-19, people have become accustomed to using social media. People are strengthening their means of income by studying YouTube videos as well as Google. All the departments are expected to use it properly in the Deprivation Eradication Mission and Gram Samriddhi Yojana.
Some of the examples are as follows: 1) Under MGNREGA, training of Sarpanch, Gram Sevak and Gram Rozgar Sevak on Samriddhi Budget for 2 hours and 3 days each was conducted through Zoom. Approximately Rs. 85,000. It cost Rs 1 lakh.
b) Two farmers were repeatedly mentioning the word' research' in a meeting of farmers who own a car in Hatkanangale taluka. what is that When asked, he was seen saying that the use of knowledge obtained from Google and YouTube videos and the actual visit of the concerned farmers in farming/ farming is called research.
Page 32 of 18.
# Page 19
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
In the village of Khomarpada (Vikramgad taluka, Palghar district), young people study and discuss together by watching YouTube videos.
14. Objectives of Nandadeep Village: Point No. As discussed in section 6, all departments will target 100 percent villages in the state for impact on deprivation. However, in the matter of enriching the entire village, the selected staff/ officers in Phase-I and Phase-II shall select the following number of villages each: a) District Level Officers- The District Level Officers under MGNREGA Scheme shall select 20 villages each, while other officers shall select one or more villages on a voluntary basis.
(b) 15 villages each to be headed by Deputy District/ Project (AVI) level officers.
(a) Taluk level officers 10 villages each (b) Village level officers 5 villages each (e) Village level officers 1 village each (f) Village level officers. Sarpanch- More than full Gram Panchayat will be allowed to elect in villages. However, less than this number should not be chosen. Various officers/ employees can jointly select the same village. However, all the concerned officers/ staff in all the concerned villages should take the responsibility of coordination together.
General Criteria for Selection of Nandadeep Taluk: The people's representatives or important persons of some taluks seem to be thinking of achieving the peak of development by creating as much as possible by implementing all the 100% permissible works under MNREGA in the ratio of 60:40, like a movement throughout the entire taluka. With the approval of the Chief Minister, MNREGA works will be implemented in this taluk as Nandadeep Taluk. Continuous training of employees/ officers and awareness among the general public will be undertaken in such taluks by the MNREGA Department.
In these taluks, the respected important persons/ public representatives will take the lead in the implementation of the schemes by providing additional funds under their control as well as additional funds from various schemes of the State and Central Government through coordination between the taluk, district and village level employees/ officials/ local public representatives.
Non-MNGREGA funds for convergence: Convergence of schemes of other departments with MGNREGA will lead to more than double the funds in the budget of that department.
All central and state government funds can be used for MNREGA. A few examples of these programs are listed below. However, the names in this list are not exhaustive. Apart from this, funds from any other scheme, individual participation and public participation can also be used.
(a) The Finance Commission
(b) Member of Parliament Local Area Development Fund
(3) Grants to Gram Panchayats for public utilities
(4) Special grants for urban amenities to large Gram Panchayats.
5) Minor Mineral Development Fund/ District Mineral Foundation Fund
Page 32 of 19
# Page 20
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
6) Subsidy to Gram Panchayats
7) Funds available from Zilla Parishad/ Panchayat Samiti Cess
8) Self-income of Gram Panchayats
9) Funds available under PESA (for villages in Scheduled Areas)
Thakkar Bappa Tribal Habitat Improvement Programme (Tribal Sub-Plan for Villages) 11) Innovation Scheme
(a) Other District Schemes
Other schemes of the Central/ State Government/ Local Bodies.
17. Creation of mechanism for administrative approval of proposal sent by Gram Sabha: Point No. In order to achieve the objectives given in section 1, the village level employees of various departments will plan the works related to their respective departments and send them to the concerned program officers at the taluk level. They will also send copies of the same to the block/ project level project officers of their respective departments. A copy of the plan related to the departments that do not have the system at the taluk level will be sent to the district level officials.
The process of granting administrative approval in the departments associated with the Panchayat Samiti will be as follows: Education Department: (e.g.) All proposals related to aided schools run by the Zilla Parishad as well as the Education Department will be submitted to the Block Education Officer. A copy of this will also be given to the Group Development Officer.
2) The proposals that come to the group education officer will be submitted to them for the following reasons.
2.1 Proposal for personal benefits to parents of out-of-school or out-of-school children.
2.2 Proposal for personal benefit to a family where 100% of the members above the age of 10 years are illiterate.
2.3. Proposals for works to make Zilla Parishad or Aided Schools attractive by using 13 works permissible as per Government Circular dated 1st December, 2020.
3) In the present situation, all the above proposals are submitted to the Panchayat Samiti office through the Gram Rozgar Sevak. The group development officer gives permission to generate the work code of the completed proposals after scrutinizing the required documents in that proposal.
This is called administrative approval. However, after the work code is generated in the computer system SECURE, the technical assistant gives technical approval to the work by preparing the budget of the work. At present, there is a system of giving administrative approval twice. However, the second time the system of granting administrative approval in SECURE is formalized. Because, all the scrutiny/ verification is done before generating the workcode. After getting administrative approval in the technical departments of the state government, a detailed budget is prepared and technical approval is given to it. The system of giving administrative and technical approval in the Panchayat Samiti is in line with the state government system.
4) The participation of group education officers in the work related to school and education will be beneficial for the education system. Therefore, the proposals are being examined to make the schools attractive.
On page 32 of 20
# Page 21
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
The responsibility of completing the documents will be of the group education officer. After that, the block development officer should not hesitate to scrutinize those cases again. This means that administrative approval for such work will be given by the group education officer.
5) The technical assistants of the works approved in this way will prepare the budget in the SECURE system, which will be paid by the Panchayat Committee, Zilla Parishad Sub-Division as well as the Minimum Engineer of the Public Works Sub-Division Rs. Technical approval will be given within a limit of Rs. 5.00 lakh and thereafter formal administrative approval in SECURE will be given by the Group Development Officer through online mode. On the proposal received from them, the Block Development Officer will be required to prepare the work code within two days of office work.
6) It is hereby clarified that the Block Development Officer or Block Education Officer will not be responsible for any technical error.
7) Maintaining 60:40 ratio: Almost all the work that is required to make the school attractive has more of a material component. Therefore, the following factors should be considered when receiving proposals from schools.
7.1 The part of the additional skill should be funded by the Department of Education.
7.2 If there is no separate fund from the Education Department, the additional expenditure of the skill should be made from the MLA/ MP fund or the Gram Panchayat fund or other such fund.
7.3 If both of the above are not possible, additional materials should be obtained from people/ parents involved.
7.4 If all three of the above are not possible, then more unskilled work should be encouraged in the village itself, such as wells, farmlands, soil work in the watered road, fruit orchards/ tree planting in the field or on the bund, tree/ fruit garden planting in the school premises, tree/ fruit garden planting in the gairan/ gaothan/ government land, etc.
7.5 Moreover, if there is any skilled availability of unskilled additional work in the taluka or other places in the district, it should be used.
8) Point No. 7.4. The work is to be done by the school/ teachers who want to make the school attractive. It is being clarified here that the teachers who are not willing should not be forced to do any of these tasks.
9) Point No. 7.4 The teacher/ school/ centre head/ block education officer shall be responsible for the completion of the work paperwork. If this is not done, the ratio of 60:40 will not be maintained. Therefore, the school cannot function.
Administrative and technical approval should be given by other authorities in the prevailing manner in cases where documents are completed but not related to school beautification.
10) Point No. The Group Education Officer shall ensure with the help of the school/ teacher that the administrative and technical approval of the works in 7.4 is obtained and the works are started. This will provide funds for the school.
On page 32 of
# Page 22
Government Resolution No: MGRRO-2022/ P.No.174/ ROHYO-6A
11) Point No. The purpose of preparing the proposal under MNREGA for the families in 2.1 and 2.2 is to enable them to buy a smartphone. There is a perception that when a family has a smartphone, it will be used in a creative way by teachers to enhance the quality of education. It is also assumed that children with good learning speed are not out of school or irregular in school. Teachers who do not use their parents' mobile phones to enhance the quality of education need not plan MNREGA for such parents. Also, teachers who are irregular in school or who believe that out-of-school children have nothing to do with their learning speed need not plan MNREGA activities for the concerned parents.
The number of Zilla Parishad teachers is 2,50,000. It will be 1 percent 2,500 and 2.5 percent 6,250. This number of teachers will be selected from Nandadeep villages. More and more teachers in every taluka will adopt villages and make them as bright as Nandadeep. Teachers should be encouraged to do this. The Block Education Officers are also being encouraged to track the progress of village prosperity in Nandadeep villages adopted by teachers working for this purpose. Apart from the beautification of schools in Nandadeep villages, the works under MNREGA should not be given administrative approval by the Block Education Officer.
13) The engineers of the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan are also working with the Group Education Officer.
They can also be used for quality and speed of work under MNREGA. These engineers can be especially helpful in calculating the ratio of 60:40.
In accordance with this Government decision, all the departments have to issue the Convergence Government Decision of their respective departments by January 6, 2023.
# Page 23
# Page 24
# Page 25
# Page 26
# Page 27
# Page 28
# Page 29
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32