# Page 1
As per the recommendations of the Second Report of the Committee on Estimates (2015-16) of the Thirteenth Legislative Assembly, the Government has decided to issue instructions regarding the functioning of the District Annual Plan (General).
The Government of Maharashtra
the Department of Planning
Government Circular No: Estimates-2022/ P. No. 60/1481-A
Ministry (Extension), Hall No. 641,
Madam Cama Marg, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mumbai- 400 032.
Date of release: September 6, 2022
Government circular
The Second Report of the Estimates Committee for 2015-16 (Thirteenth Maharashtra Legislative Assembly) has been submitted to the Legislature.
In accordance with the recommendations of the Second Report of the Estimates Committee 2015-16 (Thirteenth Maharashtra Legislative Assembly), all Collectors and Member Secretaries of District Planning Committees are hereby informed that" after receipt of the estimates of the works in the District Annual Plan, technical and administrative approval should be given within the prescribed time. Also, while making reallocation within the district, it should be done for the appropriate unit or program as per the need. Planning should be done in such a way that the balance of expenditure in the districts does not change during this redeployment.
3) Ensure that the guidelines are implemented.
The circular has been made available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in and its code number is 202209061211576816. This circular is being issued after verifying it through digital signature.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra, SANJEEV
HARISHCHANDRA
DHURI
Deputy Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, 1. District Collector and Member Secretary, District Planning Committee (all districts) 2. Office of the Divisional Commissioner, Konkan, Pune, Nashik, Aurangabad, Amravati, Nagpur Division 3. Office of the Deputy Commissioner (Planning), Divisional Commissioner, Konkan, Pune, Nashik, Aurangabad, Amravati, Nagpur Division 4. District Planning Officer, District Planning Committee (all districts) 5. Principal Accountant General, Maharashtra (Audit) 6. Planning Department (Ka. 1424), Ministry, Mumbai.
Selection Nasty, Office 1481-A, Planning Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai.