# Page 1
Implementation of Mission for Elimination of Deprivation through MGNREGA Schemes and fixing of responsibility at every level for the same.
The Government of Maharashtra
Department of Planning (ROH)
Government Circular No. : Magararohyo-2023/ Q. No.20/ Rohyo-7
16th floor, new administration building,
Madam Cama Road, Hutatma Rajguru Chowk,
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032
Date: January 25, 2023
The Employment Guarantee Act, 1977 (as amended in 2014)
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
Planning (ROHYO) Department dated 02.09.2021
Circular.
4) Planning (ROHYO) Department dated 4 th October, 2022 Prosperity Budget Estimates Government Circular for the year 2022-23.
5) The Government has decided to implement the Universal Mission for Rural Prosperity and the Convergence of Schemes of MGNREGA and various departments. December 14, 2022 Preamble: Multinational Poverty Index (MPI) has been published by NITI Aayog in September, 2021. The poverty rate in Maharashtra is 21 times that of Kerala. In the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav speech, Ma. The Prime Minister has put forward the vision of a developed India in the next 25 years. As Maharashtra is already ahead of other states, the state has decided to end the deprivation of poverty in the state in the next 10 years. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are to be achieved by 2030.
Unless every work of MGNREGA is completed with speed and quality, the people of the state will not come out of deprivation and they will not prosper.
In this way, every family will reduce its deprivation at the beginning and at the same time progress towards prosperity.
Other departments will be associated with MNREGA for this work. Earlier, only a few departments such as agriculture, forest, social forestry used to implement MNREGA. They used their own system. In the future, the Department of Women and Child Development, the Department of School Education, the departments that meet the basic needs of families will also be with them. Agriculture, sericulture, animal husbandry and fisheries departments to enhance the income of small and marginal farmers and landless labourers.
# Page 2
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Businesses will also be involved. Apart from this, the departments working for the upliftment of special sections of the society, Other Backward Bahujan Welfare, Social Justice and Special Assistance, Tribal Development Department and Minority Department will also be able to fulfill their objectives by using the funds from MNREGA.
Other departments will also be involved.
Most of these departments are only at the district level. Some have systems up to the village level, but they do not have technical staff. Therefore, in the future, the APO, PTO and CDEO working with the Panchayat Samiti and Tehsil Office will also have to do the work related to MNREGA of all those departments.
Reference No. According to the government decision of the 3rd, 36 crore man-days are expected to be generated in the state every year. The state has never produced more than 8.5 crore mandays. In the future, at least four times more man-days will have to be created, which means that the work of the employees appointed by the external organization will increase.
For this, the example of the work done by Vikramgad taluka is being put in front of everyone. In the last three years, Vikramgad taluka has generated 7 lakh, 17 lakh and 28 lakh mandays respectively. Even after the work was done four times, the employees there increased their vigilance and completed the increased work. Only 1 post of PTO had to be increased. A CDEO in this taluka has removed 19000 musters in a year.
It is not just the MGNREGA that is needed. As per the Government of India's MGNREGA Act, 2005 and the Maharashtra State Act (as amended 2014), the objectives of MGNREGA are" strengthening the livelihood base of the poor" and social inclusion. In addition, the Maharashtra state law also sets the goal of" permanently overcoming poverty by creating quality sustainable productive output through the convergence of all departments of the government."
To achieve this objective, MGNREGA works need to be fast and quality. Therefore, every employee working under MNREGA has to speed up their work. It's also prepared
Responsible work should be done to ensure that every product produced is of high quality and durable.
MGNREGA works under the aegis of NAREGASOFT and SECURE. With the help of both these computer systems, the work speed of each employee can be identified. Also, if an employee's transaction is getting more rejected, there is a delay payment, the muster does not come out on time and the work remains incomplete, and many such information can be removed from the computer system.
Page 2 of 29
# Page 3
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Speed and Quality in MGNREGA Work
The government has announced the Suvidha Kutumb Mission and the Sarvagina Gram Samriddhi Yojana under the convergence of schemes of MGNREGA and various departments. This scheme will greatly increase the number of individual jobs. In that case the speed of approval of work proposals is appropriate.
Some old things will have to be discarded while keeping the level. You will have to accept new things. Although the pace of work should be increased, the quality of work should not be reduced under any circumstances.
Most of our regulatory mechanisms are meant to avoid irregularities in the functioning. Quality control can only be done through external means. In the coming times, the implementation mechanism will have to take more responsibility towards quality. However, there is an external quality control system. A family is not complete without quality food. If not, they will not be eliminated. Therefore, there is a need to increase sensitivity towards quality in everyone.
The therapist should think about the speed of work and go through the tables as little as possible for work approval and bill payment. The government has made a rule of 3 tables. More than that, it is a waste of time to leave the table. In recent times, when irregularities were studied at one place, there was a rule to go through more than 3 tables without permission. However, there were irregularities. This means that there is no connection between missing more tables and the absence of irregularities. for the sake of where
They have to keep checks and balances on various aspects at each place by studying the irregularities that may occur. In order to bring down the irregularities to zero, every issue in terms of administrative approval as well as payment of bills needs to be monitored by the administrative head.
That doesn't mean you shouldn't trust anyone. But still, in the midst of various levels of work, inspection, discussion, asking questions of the therapist, understanding the complaints that come.
It is necessary to keep doing things like keeping the number of observations at the right level before the start, during the start and after the completion of various levels of the work. By doing this, no employee/ officer under you will dare to do any irregularity, and even such a thought will not come to their mind.
Page 29 of 3.
# Page 4
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Delegation of authority and responsibility
While delegating the authority the basic principle is that only authority can be delegated not responsibility. Now in the era of computers, digital signature has come.
Due to the workload many officers keep the dongle with their subordinates. This right is being violated. However, while doing so, the concerned junior will not misuse the dongle, its checks and balances should be kept by everyone. Random sampling of work will be useful for this.
To evaluate the work according to random sampling:
1.Take a printout of 100% of the income tax bills from the CDEO on at least one day of each week by selecting one or two days of each week by random sampling.
2. If possible, fill up the Area Officer's App by personally inspecting 100% of the work.
If physical verification is not possible, verify 100% of the work done on that day with the help of persons of your trust outside the MGNREGA system.
4. Identify the randomly selected tasks in the bill if the number of bills paid on that day is very high.
5. To ensure that in any case, some of the work done by each PTO every month is self-critical.
6. When visiting the work, along with the completion of the work, its quality and usefulness should also be verified.
7. To verify the possibility of the concerned job card holder being able to overcome his/ her deprivation by the use of the opinion. Suggesting further planning for that job card holder as per requirement etc.
How to choose a random number? A random number search on Google results in a table of numbers.
Read the numbers from the table to select the days of the week. Assume 1 for Monday, 2 for Tuesday, the initial two 1 to 5, the next action should be taken assuming that those days have come. If you can't do it every week, do it once a month. Since there are up to 31 days in a month, the two-digit number should be read in a row and 100% of the bills related work of that date should be verified by considering the number of days to come.
Page 29 of 4.
# Page 5
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
While reading such numbers, it should be ensured that the date of the bill is at least one day in every week of the month.
Similarly, if the number of bills paid on the selected day is too large
Again, use the Random Number Table when selecting the tasks. If the number of bills is less than 100, take two-digit random numbers. If the number is more than 100, then take a three-digit random number.
While taking action on all the above, special attention has to be paid to the issues that the Government of India reviews. They're as follows:
Timely payment- 100% completion of both signatures on the FTO within 8 days from the last day of the muster.
Rejected transaction- a. 0 Rejected transaction. Regenerate rejected transactions within 2 days. Completion of tree/ orchard plantation works by the third year and housekeeping works by the second year.
(b) Completion of all works except plantation of trees/ orchards and household works in the year of commencement of work.
Geo-tagging- 100% geo-tagging of the work available for geo-tagging in all three phases. Keeping the seeding ratio of the base of the active job card at 100%. 100% Aadhaar linked payment.
6. NMMS- 100% public works to be done through NMMS mobile application 7. Mission Water Conservation to keep expenditure on NRM in Taluka at 65% of total expenditure.
Keeping 60% of the total expenditure on agriculture and allied activities.
Keeping the ratio of unskilled and skilled expenditure at 60:40 at the district level 10. Every month, the District Programme Coordinator and the Co-District Programme Coordinator should inspect and report 15 works to the Area Officer application.
Page 29 of 5
# Page 6
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Considering all the above factors, the state government has decided to create a fund so that 100 percent families living below the poverty line in the state get at least 100 days of wages every year.
Under this decision of the government, the matter of changing the decision of everyone in the system at every level was under the consideration of the government. Following this, the government took decision:
Government circular:
The District Coordinator and the District Coordinator are responsible for:
MGNREGA is no longer just a scheme of" work for all." This scheme will benefit families and villages. Therefore, to create a circle around this scheme so that people look at this scheme with a positive eye.
2. To complete the priority tasks of the Government of India in a time bound manner.
3. Maintaining the level of unskilled skill at the district level is taking shape in the state. Earlier, the state was not able to maintain this ratio and therefore, the funds available for the development of rural areas could not be used. It is everyone's responsibility to pay attention to this issue. Accordingly, the works approved at the state level should be implemented expeditiously. Ensure that the skill level is not less than 40%.
4. To meet the average person days of a district every year from 2022-23 on the basis of multidimensional poverty indicators.
5. To ensure that the distribution of the district index as determined above is made to the Taluk and Gram Panchayat within the next 15 days and everyone is informed.
To plan their income generation through MGNREGA by surveying the households in each Gram Panchayat of the district to hit on the dimensions of multi-dimensional poverty deprivation with priority on health (overcoming malnutrition, making anganwadis attractive), education (regular attendance of children in schools, adult literacy and making schools attractive) and improving living standards (gas cylinders, mobiles).
7.1.Provide 100 days of work per year to each family living below the multi-dimensional poverty line from 2022-23. Monthly review of approvals being made at S/ Taluka level. using security for this purpose.
Page 29 of 6.
# Page 7
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
7.2.The works so sanctioned are being implemented from time to time. For this purpose, every week, it is reviewed that at every block/ panchayat level, adequate number of musters (BPL families X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Use a soft brush for this.
7.3. Review of Geo Tagging Levels 1, 2 and 3.
To ensure timely and efficient payment to the beneficiaries during the implementation of MGNREGA works: 8.1. Weekly review of Timely Payment (T+ 8). Also to take action against the concerned if the payment is delayed due to the fault of an employee.
Implementation of Zero Rejected transaction policy. To take action against the concerned if the transaction is rejected due to the fault of an employee.
8.3. To find out the reasons for the delay in the discharge of a work and to resolve it. By doing this, the number of incomplete tasks is reduced to zero.
8.4.Reduce the number of Zero Masters to zero. The main reason for having a Zero Muster is that the work does not start after the Muster. The reason for this is the late arrival of the muster to the village employment officer. One of the reasons for this is the perception that muster requires the counter signature of the program officer. But here it is being brought to the notice of all that there is no need for a counter signature as the muster is being generated online.
8.5. To review the payment of personal skills to be submitted every fifteen days.
9. Monitoring and reporting at all levels in NMMS system to ensure quality of works under MGNREGS.
To provide training under Project Unnati to the families who have completed 100 days to increase the income of the families by using the drugs produced under MNREGA.
11. To review the decline in deprivation of households under the Multidimensional Poverty Index.
12. Collector to remove encroachments on Panand road with the help of Tahsildar.
13. To encourage land holders to enter into agreements for providing land on lease basis to landless people for production of buttermilk.
The work of MNREGA will remove the deprivation of the people, the families will prosper, the social inclusion of the people will happen, the villages will develop all-round. These are laudable works. Therefore, to create awareness that the work of MNREGA should be considered as a work of pride. Creating a circle, reputation around MGNREGA work.
Page 7 of 29
# Page 8
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
The State has implemented the Suvidha Sampoorna Kutumb Mission and the Sarvottam Gram Samriddhi Yojana.
Many decisions will be taken by the government. If there is any difficulty in implementing the decision, the government should be informed immediately. Present problems told to beneficiaries
It comes and it doesn't work. Ensure that this does not happen in the future by yourself and your subordinates.
Responsibilities of Deputy Collector (MGNREGA)/ Deputy Executive Officer (MGNREGA)
To assist the District Programme Coordinator and the District Co-Programme Coordinator in discharging their responsibilities.
2. Capacity building, training, control, review and follow-up at the level of Tahsildars and Block Development Officers to ensure that they are successful in discharging their responsibilities at the block level.
3. Maintaining the level of unskilled skill at the district level is taking shape in the state. Earlier, the state could not maintain this ratio and hence the funds available for the development of rural areas could not be used. It is everyone's responsibility to pay attention to this issue. Accordingly, the works sanctioned at the state level should be implemented expeditiously. Ensure that the skill level is not less than 40%.
4. The State has implemented the Suvidha Sampoorna Kutumb Mission and the Sarvottam Gram Samriddhi Yojana. Many decisions will be taken by the government. If there is any difficulty in implementing the decision, the government should be informed immediately. Present problems told to beneficiaries
It comes and it doesn't work. Ensure that this does not happen in the future by yourself and your subordinates.
The Deputy Collector (MGNREGA)/ Deputy Executive Officer (MGNREGA) will be fully responsible for the implementation of the Suvidha Kutumb Mission and the Samagra Gram Samriddhi Yojana. In case of any failure in this work, responsibility will be fixed on these two officers.
Responsibilities of Tahsildar/ Block Development Officer
1. Maintaining the level of unskilled skill at the district level is currently taking shape in the State. Earlier, the state could not maintain this ratio and hence the funds available for the development of rural areas could not be used. It is everyone's responsibility to pay attention to this issue. The work is being implemented at the state level.
Page 29 of 8.
# Page 9
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
to make it fast. Ensure that the skill level is not less than 40%.
The Deputy Collector (MGNREGA)/ Deputy Executive Officer (MGNREGA) will be fully responsible for the implementation of the Upliftment of Families Mission and the Sarvottamik Gram Samriddhi Yojana. In case of any failure in this work, responsibility will be fixed on these two officers.
Provide at least 15 days of MNREGA work every month to the parents of malnourished children in the taluk and 100 percent of the children who are irregular in school up to the eighth grade.
4. MGNREGA works to be provided every month for 5 days so that 100% of the marginalized families in the taluk can fill the gas cylinder.
To provide at least 30 days of MGNREGA work to enable 100% minority job card holders in the taluka who do not have a smartphone to buy a smartphone.
Then provide at least 2 days of work every month so that data packs can be filled in it.
6.While doing the above tasks, the concerned job card holder should continue to create his own ownership, taking more and more personal tasks for this. The priorities of individual works are given below.
6.1. Construction of Household 6.2. Soak Pits 6.3. Nadep, Vermi Compost Structure 6.4. Fruit orchards, floriculture, bund plantation, sericulture.
6.5. Well fields.
6.6. Cow shed, goat shed, poultry shed.
To provide training to the concerned families to make the best use of the honey after producing it, to train the families who have worked more than 100 days in a year for the development of the project. Educating other families through YouTube videos and online.
8. While carrying out the above works, the works of wells, ponds, waterways etc. should be completed as per the demand of the people.
Pay attention to both speed and quality when performing these tasks. For this, all the work proposals should be approved within a day of receiving the complete proposal, issue the muster within the next day, see that the work is started the next day, see that the muster is released every week, record the MB so that the bills of the skilled can be paid every two weeks, GO page 9 of 29
# Page 10
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Getting the tagging done then paying the bills, thus trying to get the work done in a quality manner within the stipulated time and start getting the product out of it.
10. Identify and take up works by regular and external staff who are disrupting the speed and quality of work. To take action/ propose to the concerned in time.
In the future, officers of all departments of the government will work to achieve the goals of their department. The government's policy is to provide the services of APO, PTO, and CDEO in the taluka to help them. Completely confirming this policy of the government, all the employees made available by the external agencies under your authority will be available to other departments, so that everyone's vigilance is increased. Encourage everyone to use technology (WhatsApp, Google Meet, Zoom) and train them in time.
Completion of unfinished work in the next two months.
13. Tahsildar to remove encroachments on Panand road immediately.
14. To encourage the land holders to enter into agreement as per law for providing land on lease basis to the landless people for the production of buttermilk.
15. To work expeditiously through the mechanism decided by the Gram Panchayat in respect of various public works. If the system decided by the Gram Panchayat is not working at a fast pace, then it should be encouraged to work by finding the system which works at a faster pace and propose action on the first system.
Ensure that each muster is submitted and signed for Stage I and Stage II and the payment is made at (T+ 8).
Ensure that the proposals received from the Panchayat Samiti/ Taluka Office will be approved within 7 days.
18. Every Gram Panchayat to be informed of the Gram Panchayat-wise allocation from the district level as per the multidimensional poverty indicators.
19. Ensure that the Gram Panchayat wise MGNREGA proposals are submitted to the Panchayat Samiti and Tehsil office and are approved.
20.To ensure that the work of the proposals approved from the Panchayat Committee/ Taluka level is started and regular musters are issued every week.
21. To train the concerned if there are fewer proposals from some Gram Panchayats. To propose action on the concerned if the number of proposals does not increase even after providing training.
22. Inquire into delay in implementation of approved proposals and take appropriate steps.
Page 29 of 10.
# Page 11
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
If the ongoing works are not submitted in the muster (T+ 8), the responsibility of Gram Rozgar Sevak, Technical Assistant (TA) or Clerk cum Data Entry Operator (CDEO) should be fixed by conducting an inquiry with the help of Assistant Programme Officer (APO) on each delayed muster and if necessary, to propose action against the concerned.
24. The State has implemented the Suvidha Sampoorna Kutumbakam Mission and the Sarvottam Gram Samriddhi Yojana.
Many decisions will be taken by the government. If there is any difficulty in implementing the decision, the government should be informed immediately. At present, problems are reported to the beneficiaries and work is not done. Ensure that this does not happen in the future by yourself and your subordinates.
Capacity Building Cell, Human Resource Development Coordinator and CFP State Level Coordinator
To develop awareness, knowledge, skills and sensitivities about all aspects of this circular in the designated districts.
To hold meetings and workshops at the district level. It will be mandatory for the District MIS Coordinator to be present with all the data.
District Programme Coordinators and District Co-Programme Coordinators are requested to attend these meetings.
At the first such meeting, the attendance of all block development officers, tehsildars, taluka agriculture officers is being made mandatory.
As per the requirement, these coordinators will hold meetings and workshops at the district and taluka level of the employees and Gram Rozgar Sevaks appointed by the external sources.
Articles, photographs, videos, interviews, etc. of success stories achieved at various levels in the state will be shared in these meetings.
7. In these meetings, discussions will be held on the success of the state, district, taluka and gram panchayat by analyzing the success in the respective district and taluk.
Invalid payment is possible within 8 days. Payment of personal skills is possible within 15 days. to raise awareness of these and other issues.
9. Discuss the possible impact of deprivation on multi-dimensional poverty indicators.
10. Discussing" Catch the Rain when it falls, where it falls," the need for a well and farmyard with a dam enclosure for" water to every farm" as well as water cost effectiveness.
Page 29 of 11.
# Page 12
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Discussing that use is for increasing productivity and not just for saving water and increasing organic carbohydrates.
11.C. Discussion on how to become a millionaire by rearing goats by making use of money.
12.Sh. Discussion on becoming a millionaire by using the pond as an aquarium.
13. Discuss the benefits of orchards, tree plantations, silk and floriculture.
Responsibilities of District MIS Coordinator:
1. To determine the Gram Panchayat wise number of man days and muster roll within fifteen days based on the district's index.
(2) To provide all necessary information for the implementation of this circular from time to time.
3.1 To inform the District Programme Coordinator and Programme Coordinator about the pending muster for signature of Stage I and Stage II at the Taluk level every week.
3.2 To give the list of the Gram Panchayats and all the systems which have not been submitted for payment even after 15 days of the issue of the muster to the Block Development Officer/ Tahsildar every week.
3.3 (T+ 8) Notification of 10 taluka wise/ system wise musters which have not been submitted and which have been submitted most late, to the Block Development Officer/ Tahsildar/
3.4 To submit the information about the 10 longest Gram Panchayats of the district and the musters of all the systems that have not been issued and submitted at the state level to the District Program Coordinator and the District Co-Program Coordinator.
3.5 To prepare the slabs by preparing the information about the work of the Gram Panchayat and all the systems that have taken more than 30 days after the last muster.
3.5.1 31 days to 90 days
3.5.2 91 days to 180 days
3.5.3 181 days and more
3.6 REJECTED TRANSACTIONS: Prepare weekly data and provide information on taluk-wise and CDEO-wise numbers at the district and state level.
3.6.1 Preparation of CDEO data for the last 3 years in respect of rejected transactions.
3.6.2 CDEO wise ratio of total muster rolls paid and transactions rejected to Taluk, District and State.
Page 29 of 12.
# Page 13
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
The Responsibility of the Village Employee
(At least 1500 Gram Rozgar Sevaks in the State draw honorarium of more than Rs. This is the GRS
All areas of the state. In Vikramgad taluka, 59 out of 62 GRSs draw an honorarium of more than one lakh. There are 5 GRS above 5 lakhs. )
1. To find out the number of Gram Panchayats received from the district/ taluka level.
Obtaining list of malnourished children (MAM and SAM) in all Anganwadis available in Gram Panchayat area.
3. To obtain the list of children who are not attending schools regularly in the Gram Panchayat area, and to prepare a list of children whose names have not been registered in the school, and to prepare a list of children who are eligible for admission in the school in the Gram Panchayat area.
In the Gram Panchayat area:
4.1 Non-cooled gas cylinders
4.2 Mobile with data pack
None of the above 4.3
Create a list of families.
To prepare a list of landless and less than 5 acre land holders in the Gram Panchayat.
6. Planning with the help of Anganwadi workers and principals to make Anganwadis and schools attractive.
7. Prioritization of families belonging to Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes, Farmer Suicide affected families and Single women in the list of beneficiaries of aforesaid Sections 2, 3, 4 and 5.
Preparation of proposals for the work of producing flour in accordance with the above priority order and 100 percent of the families in the list will get at least 100 days of wages every year from the year 2022-23 and submit them to the Panchayat Samiti office.
9. To ensure that the Clerk cum Data Entry Operator (CDEO) takes note of the proposal in the SECURE system while submitting such proposal to the Panchayat Samiti.
10. Call for muster for early commencement of works as per approved proposals. Sending a message to the CDEO and technical assistant on their mobile.
Page 29 of 13.
# Page 14
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Submission to the Panchayat Samiti/ Tehsil office for payment on the same day as the completion of the ongoing works.
To send messages to the mobile phone from the technical assistant for MB recording and Geo Tagging from time to time.
In case of any difficulty in the implementation of any work in the village, it should be informed to the Block Development Officer/ Tehsildar/ Assistant Programme Officer and Technical Assistant on the same day.
14.To ensure that the sanctioned works are completed on time by following the regular muster.
15.A. To ensure that the payment of the fee is also submitted every 15 days in any case.
16.Take care of the quality of work done under MANNER category.
17.If you are a beneficiary, make sure that your bank account is alive and submit the payment on muster. Also, if a beneficiary's account has been active for more than 6 months since the last payment, it should be ensured that his account is alive by looking at the transaction records within 6 months in the passbook.
Make sure that the bank account number and Aadhaar number are filled correctly. Also, send a photo of the passbook, Aadhaar card and job card to the Clerk cum Data Entry Operator and APO through WhatsApp.
It should be ensured that the works under the Gram Panchayat are done in 60:40 ratio. The Assistant Programme Officers and Technical Assistants should guide the Gram Rozgar Sevaks from time to time in this regard.
20.Only public work should be given on a job card if the wages are being paid for more than 100 days. Care should be taken that no job card should be given more than 100 days of work for personal work.
21.Akh. If there is more than one married couple in the family, care should be taken to issue separate job cards to each of them.
The Gram Rozgar Sevak should also take care of issuing job cards to any unmarried adult (above 18 years of age) in the family if they demand.
23. Complaint to Collector, CEO and Government if any officer/ employee at higher level is reluctant to do any of these works.
Page 29 of 14.
# Page 15
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
24.Read the list of responsibilities every day and keep track of the things left out.
25. To ensure that at least one lakh rupees per annum is received as remuneration for such diligent work.
Data Entry Operator and Clerk (CDO)
(All CDEOs in Vikramgad taluka draw 14,000 musters each in a year. A CDEO draws 19,000 musters)
(1) To ensure that all payments are made in muster (T+ 8) in any case.
Ensure that no transaction is rejected. 2.1. Entering each letter of the beneficiary's name correctly.
2.2. Entering the bank account number correctly.
2.3. Accurate entry of Aadhaar number.
2.4 If a beneficiary's name (including the new beneficiary) has not been mistered for more than 6 months, then a copy of his bank passbook through WhatsApp and ensure transaction entry in it within 6 months.
If the transaction is rejected for any of the above reasons, the clerk and data entry operator will be liable for action.
4. Clerks and Data Entry Operators to work hard to get more proposals from the villages under their jurisdiction with the help of Assistant Programme Officers, Technical Assistants in case the muster does not come from the assigned villages as per the requirement.
5. Entering new job card, data of job card segregation 6. Creating e-muster on demand.
7. Uploading of e-muster used in the work on NREGA website.
Updating the job card information, updating the information on the website for the renewal of the job card, uploading the information of the new job card on the website.
Uploading of complete information of unskilled, skilled and semi-skilled expenditure on NREGA website.
Uploading of documents and photographs of the completion of the work.
Updating all the information related to the scheme on NREGA Soft.
12. Typing and removal of copies in connection with office work.
Preparation of other reports relating to the scheme for the Programme Officer.
14. All directions given by senior officers regarding data entry to be strictly followed.
Page 29 of 15.
# Page 16
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
The duties of Clerk and Data Entry Operator mentioned above are only for guidance and may be modified by the Controlling Authority as per the actual local situation.
Responsibilities of the Technical Assistant
1) Recording MB as well as Geo Tagging from time to time for all muster payments to be made in (T+ 8) 2) Receiving proposals in your area of operation as required and collecting necessary field visits, documents for approval of those proposals 3) Technical approval of the cases approved by the Group Development Officer, preferably on the same day.
(iv) To provide continuous guidance to Sarpanchs, Gram Sevaks, Gram Rozgar Sevaks and beneficiaries so that 60:40 ratio is maintained in every Gram Panchayat as far as possible.
6) Technical officers to inspect all the works in their area of work and keep the works on the shelf.
7) To complete the work of annual planning plan and annual prosperity budget at the level of Gram Panchayat and Gram Panchayat Committee within the stipulated time.
8) Commencement of work from the Gram Panchayat as per the demand of the worker, recording the date of commencement of work in accordance with the work completed, measuring and evaluating the work as soon as the period of attendance is over, taking action so that the attendance sheet of the workers and the work measurement booklet are submitted at the Panchayat Committee level on priority. In case of delay in payment of wages, the labourer will have to be compensated with interest, so that there is no delay by taking proper precautions regarding the quality of work.
9) Instant verification of completion of works by conducting periodic inspections to issue completion certificates from the Gram Panchayat.
10) To visit the Gram Panchayats in the area of work from time to time and to keep the records at the Gram Panchayat level updated. To guide the Gram Sevaks, Village Development Officers in keeping the records updated.
Page 29 of 16.
# Page 17
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
11) Educating the labourers in terms of starting the work through the Gram Panchayat, informing the labourers about the budgetary provisions of the work, the rates at different levels of work.
The duties of the Technical Officers mentioned above are only for guidance and may be modified by the Controlling Authorities depending upon the actual local situation.
The responsibility of the Assistant Programme Officer is to inform all the Gram Panchayats of the taluka about their targets and how many musters will be released accordingly.
(ii) 100% of the households in each Gram Panchayat, including malnourished children, school dropouts, fully illiterate families, out of school children, families without mobile phones with gas cylinders or data packs, SC/ ST, suicide affected farmer families and single women, will be provided 100 days of wage work every year.
3) Planning and implementation as per the Government decision dated 01.12.2020 to make Anganwadis and schools in Gram Panchayats (Zilla Parishad, Tribal VJNT and Aided Schools) attractive.
4) To ensure that the ratio of 60:40 is maintained at the taluka level.
5) Ensure that no transaction is rejected in the taluk. To investigate the rejection of a transaction and propose action against the responsible person (Gram Rozgar Sevak or Clerk cum Data Anti Operator).
6) To ensure that 100% of the taluka will be paid as per muster (T+ 8).
To investigate the delay in submission of a muster and propose action against the person responsible (Gram Rozgar Sevak, Clerk cum Data Anti Operator or Technical Assistant).
7) To analyze the data provided by the District MIS Coordinator every week to ensure that adequate individual and public works are proposed, approved and implemented in each village in the taluka.
8) Ensure that the Gram Rozgar Sevak, Clerk cum Data Anti-Operator or Technical Assistant in the taluka are fulfilling their responsibilities 100% by getting more information from the MIS in accordance with the data received from the district level.
Page 29 of 17
# Page 18
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
9) To take action for 100% distribution of identity cards, NOB cards to the registered labor families.
10) To prepare the schedule of Gram Panchayat-wise Gram Sabha for social audit and to complete the social audit work within the prescribed time and submit the report to the district level and complete the data entry work.
12) Gram Panchayat-wise ongoing work in line with the ongoing work. To submit weekly reports on the attendance of laborers on the job, the work available on the shelf of the Gram Panchayat and its unskilled estimated amount, the cost of the work, to the ZP and the Collector's Office every Thursday without delay.
13) To ensure that there is no delay in the submission of the attendance card of the workers by the Gram Panchayat and the technical officer and to ensure that the wage payment of the workers is not delayed.
14) To visit the Gram Panchayats in the area of work from time to time and to keep the records at the Gram Panchayat level updated. To guide the Gram Sevaks, Village Development Officers in keeping the records updated.
15) To submit the necessary report information from time to time to the Tehsildar, Block Development Officer at the Taluka level. Seek help from tahsildars, block development officers, to solve problems at the taluk and gram panchayat levels. To act as Coordinator to Tahsildar and Block Development Officer.
16) Take action to solve the problems related to the work, complaints at the taluka level, take timely cognizance of the problems, complaints, investigate the matter and submit an accurate report at the district and taluka level.
17) To complete the tasks assigned by the administration as per the instructions received from the government, district level, taluka level in the context of the scheme.
The duties of the above mentioned Assistant Programme Officer posts have been indicated for guidance only and the Controlling Officer may make certain changes in the same as per the actual local situation.
Page 29 of 18
# Page 19
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Fulfillment of work-related obligations of employees received from external organizations
(1) Contractual employees relating to the subject matter
GRS, PTO, APO, CDEO
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
GRS: Gram Rozgar Sevak is aware of all the work that is being done in the Gram Panchayat limits
PTO: The technical assistant is responsible for preparing the budget of each work and geo-tagging of each work.
APO: It is the job of the APO to monitor and plan and complete all kinds of works in the taluka.
CDEO: CDEOs are responsible for issuing attendance sheets on works, so they can tell how much work has been spent on which works and how many attendance sheets can be issued on the works.
3. Who is responsible for the employee concerned in the above matter?
GRS: Gram Rozgar Sevak of all types of work being done in their Gram Panchayat
A plan is made for the completion of the work. If there is any personal work and the work remains incomplete for many days, the Gram Rozgar Sevak is expected to exchange personal views with the beneficiaries and motivate them to complete the work by resolving the problems faced by them. If the work is in public
The work is expected to be completed in coordination with the system.
PTO: Among the taluk level employees associated with MNREGA, the person who is most in touch with the Gram Panchayat, beneficiaries and Gram Rozgar Sevak is the technical assistant. Before preparing the estimates of the beneficiaries, visit the site, then take photos of the works at 3 different stages and work to measure the works for each attendance sheet.
All the work is done by technical staff. Because of this, what is the current status of the work, what is the reason for which the work is incomplete and what can be done, all these things are related to the technical assistant.
Page 29 of 19
# Page 20
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
APO: The main work of the Assistant Programme Officer is to coordinate with various systems at the taluk level, solve various types of problems encountered while working, complete all types of works in coordination with the officers and staff at the taluk level and gram panchayat level. APOs are required to monitor the incomplete works in the taluk every week by preparing lists of different types of works system-wise, year-wise, work-wise, cost-wise and making them available to the concerned agencies.
CDEO: These computer operators are responsible for taking attendance sheets of every work going on in the taluka. Because of this, the computer driver is aware of the work that is going on, the work on which the muster has not been removed for many days, so the computer driver is meant to study the work on which the muster was removed earlier but now the muster is not coming out and inform the concerned officials about it.
How to check the responsibility of this person (from Naregasoft or other way)
As per the incomplete work report R 06.18 available on MIS, system wise, work wise, cost wise, year wise work wise information is available. If the taluks take information every week and find out the information of the last week and the current week, how many works are incomplete gram panchayat-wise and technical assistant-wise and which technical assistant has been given the certificate of completion of how many works in the last week? How much work was recorded online by the computer operator? Determine the responsibilities by removing this information
5) Determine their standards.
(100% of work completed)
Computer Operator: Every week, information about the system, gram panchayat and cost-wise work should be taken out of the MIS and given to the APO and the completion of the work provided by the technical assistant should be done online with the approval of the taluk level officer.
APO: Setting the target for each week according to the PTO based on the information received from the computer operator and giving it to the PTO with the signature of the program officer and submitting a progress report of the work done during that week. Also to review the work done by GRS and PTO and submit to the Programme Officer.
Page 29 of 20
# Page 21
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
PTO: Every week, the Sarpanch prepares a record of the completion of the completed work and makes it available to the computer operator and analyzes the work on which there is little expenditure left.
And completing the work by planning with the help of GRS.
GRS: To plan and submit a report to APO in order to complete the incomplete work by keeping this topic in Gram Samriddhi Day every month. Also, provide workers to complete the incomplete work and submit their demands to the taluk.
6. other issues related to the topic
There is a time limit for completion of many tasks, such as tree plantation for a maximum of 3 years, one week for suckers, nursery for 09-18 months, and the technical assistant must plan the completion of this work. All types of first priority
The technical assistant should be instructed to complete the tasks which have been completed for a long time by analyzing the work.
Timely Payment
(There are 4 districts in the state where 100% of the payments are made in T+ 8)
(1) Contractual employees relating to the subject matter
CDEO, GRS, PTO, JE (line Agency), APO
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
CDEO: Generate Muster, Fill Muster, Generate Wage list and send, Help 1st Sign to do FTO, Help 2nd Sign to do FTO.
GRS:- Receiving and attending the Muster generated by the Taluk level, filling the attendance and delivering it to the Muster office in time.
PTO, JE:- To record the measurement (MB) of the work within 3 days after the closing of the attendance sheet and submit it to the CDEO for online.
APO:- Issue after generating Muster, call back from GRS in time, get MB done in time by Technical Assistant, Pass for Payment, it can be done by CDEO
On page 29 of
# Page 22
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
Fill the Muster, Generate the Wagelist, FTO with 1st Sign and 2nd Sign.
3. What is the responsibility of the employee concerned in the above matter?
CDEO:- To generate Muster, after receiving the attendance letter from PTO/ GRS/ Agency JE, within 2 days to create the wage list by filling the Muster and send it to the next login (T+ 5 days).
GRS: It is the responsibility of the GRS to enter the date of receipt of Muster and the date of return after attendance in the muster tracker sheet.
PTO, JE:- To register the MB within 3 days from the date of expiry of the muster period and submit it to the Taluk Office for data entry.
APO:- After generating the Muster, it will be the responsibility of the APO to ensure that the date of issue is put on the muster tracker sheet of the Gram Panchayat/ System, check the regular muster trucker, get the attendance sheet processed and controlled by the GRS, PTO, CDEO on time, follow up with the CDEO, GRS, TA/ JE for timely delivery.
Issue Muster
PTO& GRS: Start the work by micro-planning in all the Gram Panchayats under your jurisdiction and send the demand of laborers to the Taluka for the work to be started by GRS.
CDEO:- Generate the demand for work received from the GRS/ Coordinating System in time.
APO:- To generate Muster of the work as per the demand and to start the work in all the Gram Panchayats.
How to check the responsibility of this person (from Naregasoft or other way)
On the reverse side of each muster, the GRS, PTO and CDEO should note the date of transfer of the muster to the next person. Also from the muster tracker at the gram panchayat/ system level.
APO:- The APO will be responsible for recovering the amount of delay by the Programme Officer from the person who delays as per the date recorded on the reverse side of each muster.
On page 29 of
# Page 23
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
APO:- The information about how many works are going on gram panchayat-wise and how many of them have been issued musters in the current week should be taken from NAREGSOFT and submitted to the program officer. Also, the responsible person should get an explanation from the Gram Panchayat in which the works have been started but the muster has not been issued, why the muster has not been issued and submit such a report to the Taluk and District Office.
Don't allow transactions
(There are 2 districts in the state where the proportion of rejected transactions is zero)
Contractual employees related to the subject
GRS, APO, CDEO
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
While obtaining the bank account number of the labourers under GRS-NREGA, it will be required to be submitted only after obtaining the updated/ current bank passbook/ bank statement. Current Passbook is the one in which transactions have been made within 6 months. This process for a new bank account is a one-time process and must be done with a passbook. Passbooks should also be taken if a worker has not been in work for more than 6 months.
It is necessary to obtain the correct and current bank account passbook/ statement from the APO-Gram Rozgar Sevak and make it available to the operator.
CDEO- Making the worker's account number online according to the passbook, while doing online, making sure that the bank/ branch is merged, while entering the bank account number, making sure that the digits of the account number are correct, the beginning of the bank account number starts with a particular digit, it must be recorded accordingly.
How to check the responsibility of the person (from Naregasoft or other way)
This has to be verified using the records on NREGA soft and the documents and other things available with everyone.
4) Determine their standards.
GRS- If the copy of the passbook is not delivered to the CDEO/ APO through WhatsApp, e-mail and other means.
On page 29 of
# Page 24
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
CDEO- If the account number is entered incorrectly.
If the APO does not ensure the account is current (transaction within 6 months) or closed, the APO will be held responsible if the rejection rate of the said taluk is higher than other talukas.
6. other issues related to the topic
This will also be applicable to Aadhaar enrolment.
Regeneration of pending rejected transaction
Contractual employees related to the subject
CDEO, APO, GRS
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
CDEO- To take a list of all the cases in connection with the disposal of pending rejected cases, and then to divide the list system-wise and reason-wise and to give the list to the APO and to inform him about the current bank account.
APO- According to the list received from the operator, by sending the list to the concerned Gram Panchayat and the system, getting the account number of the laborer and giving it to the operator. Take a copy of the passbook/ statement while taking the account number
GRS-APO to collect the list from all those who have cases, obtain the account number passbook/ return letter from them and submit it to APO within 2 days so that the cases are settled and wages are collected.
How to check the responsibility of the person (from Naregasoft or other way)
The responsibilities of these persons will be decided on the basis of the cases on NREGA soft, whether the cases are divided systematically or not, and whether they have been given to the concerned Gram Panchayat and whether the cases have been transferred to the concerned Gram Panchayat. Whether RoS has given the copy of the passbook or not. Everyone will have to check in accordance with the available documents and other things
4) Determine their standards.
To take action if the person concerned is making a mistake and very old transactions are pending even after repeated written, oral instructions. Also, take action against the concerned if any case is rejected more than once.
On page 29 of 24
# Page 25
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
NMMS
Contractual employees related to the subject
CDEO, GRS
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
CDEO:- To register the respective GRS of the Taluka for the use of NMMS system in all Gram Panchayats of the Taluka.
Creation of Whats App group for all Gram Panchayats on NREGA Soft.
As soon as the demand of 20 or more workers is received for the work in the Gram Panchayat, the concerned Gram Panchayat GRS and the concerned Gram Panchayat PTO should be informed about it as soon as the muster is issued. APO should also be informed about it.
After receiving the muster online attendance of more than 20 workers, the payment should be made online through the Payment Only option and complete the payment by creating a Wage List and FTO.
Provide updated NMMS App APK to all GRS from time to time.
It is the responsibility of the concerned employment servant to take 2 hours of attendance at the physical workplace through the NMMS app.
GRS:- 1. Submission for NMMS for which you have registered with Nrega Soft.
2. To keep a record of the number of labourers working in the Gram Panchayat who are more than 20.
Downloading the master data in your app only once in the morning of the work with more than 20 workers.
The first online attendance of NMMS should be done before 11.00 am and the second should be done within 4 hours after the first attendance.
If there is a technical problem in the apps, immediately inform the APO with a screen shot of the technical problem.
It is the responsibility of the concerned job sevak to take 2 hours of attendance at the actual workplace in time through the NMMS app.
How to check the responsibility of the person (from Naregasoft or other way)
Page 29 of 25
# Page 26
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
The APO shall prepare and submit to the Programme Officer, from the reports available on NAREGASOFT, the number of jobs attended by more than 20 workers per week and the number of jobs attended by NMMS.
5) Determine their standards.
Since the responsibilities of CDEO and GRS are different, their parameters can be determined according to their responsibilities.
Expenditure on NRM & Agriculture activities
Subject-related contractual employees APO, PTO
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
The role of APO is to ensure that the plans received by the Gram Panchayats include NRM and agriculture and allied activities, submit the planning plan at the district level for approval, prepare a single plan of activities of the Gram Panchayats and the system.
The role of PTO: The technical assistant of the taluka should attend the gram panchayat's shibar pheri and inform the people of the village about the NRM and agriculture and agriculture-related works and include these works in the planning plan of the gram panchayat.
3. What is the responsibility of the employee concerned in the above matter?
APO:- (i) To take necessary action for receipt of proposals and sanction of works. (ii) To follow up on the work done. (iii) To control the expenditure on NRM and agriculture and allied activities to the extent of 65% or more. iv) Coordinate the problems and bring them to the notice of the concerned Tehsildar/ Block Development Officer.
PTO:- (i) Preparation of works budget and obtaining technical approval. (ii) To receive payments as per the assessment of works and submit to the Panchayat Samiti/ Tehsil/ Division Office. (iv) The completion of the completed works. v) Geo-tagging of works at various stages.
On page 29 of
# Page 27
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
How to check the responsibility of this person (from Naregasoft or other way)
APO:- To review the reports of R 6.11, R 26.9, R 26.10 for NRM activities and R 18.2, R 18.3 for agriculture and allied activities as reported in NREGA Soft.
PTO:- Monitoring of the technical approval of the budgetary works prepared on the basis of the PTO from the SECURE system. ii) Monitoring of incomplete work of PTOs, Geo tagging, etc. through Google Sheets.
5) Determine their standards.
To determine the proportion of expenditure on non-NRM/ non-agriculture activities to NRM and expenditure on agriculture and allied activities.
Secure
(1) Contractual employees relating to the subject matter
PTO
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Demand for labour work, creation of man-days as per the approved annual plan and for the Gram Panchayat |
| Keeping in mind the need for shelf formation, prepare a budget accordingly.                             |
| Planning and taking action accordingly regarding obtaining technical and administrative approvals.      |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. What is the responsibility of the employee concerned in the above matter?
----------------------------------------------------------------
| 1. based on the indicators received in the SECURE as planned |
| Create a budget as needed.                                   |
----------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 2. Accurate budget prepared by the concerned engineer/ agricultural officer for technical approval. |
| Send to Secure Login.                                                                               |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(iii) To follow up the process of providing technical and administrative approval to the budget.
How to check the responsibility of this person (from Naregasoft or other way)
----------------------------------------------------------------
| NREGASOFT Report R 6.24 Secure from NREGASOFT in every Taluk |
| The code that is shared with NREGASOFT from SECURE by P.M.   |
----------------------------------------------------------------
On page 29 of
# Page 28
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| You will get the number of tasks sent to the BHUVAN APP for indexing and geo-tagging. |
| This will get a taluk-wise pendency.                                                  |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------
| 2. Secure District Login> Reports> Work Status Report |
| Secure tabs will get pendency about indexes           |
---------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 3. Secure District Login> Reports> AS/ TS Pending from each Taluka    |
| You will get the information about the pending index as per the user. |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
5) Determine their standards.
A time frame should be set for the preparation of the budget.
GeoMGNREGA
(1) Contractual employees relating to the subject matter
PTO, APO
2. What is the role of the employee concerned in the above matter?
PTO: Geo-tagging of work.
APO:- Manages GAS Login at Taluka level.
3. What is the responsibility of the employee concerned in the above matter?
PTO: To complete the Geo-tagging of pending works.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
| APO:- 1) Moderation of Geo-tagged work photos by Technical Assistant |
| to do.                                                               |
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2) Approving the registration of MSE from the GAS Login.
How to check the responsibility of this person (from Naregasoft or other way)
APO, PTO:-GAS/ DGNO login on Geo MGNREGA Portal to check pending issues
5) Determine their standards.
PTO:- Their parameters can be determined according to the number of pending work.
On page 29 of
# Page 29
Government Circular No: Mgrarohiyo-2023/ PR No.20/ Rohyo-7
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
| APO:- Geo-tagging by the technical assistant to moderate the work photos. |
| A time period must be specified.                                          |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------