# Page 1
Maharashtra Telecom Infrastructure
Guidelines for Urban Local Bodies 2022
Government of Maharashtra
Urban Development Department
Government Resolution No. Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032
Date 19th December, 2022
Read :- (1) State Broadband Committee Meeting Dated 01.06.2021 (2) Urban Development Department GR No.Sankirna-2021/C.R.242/UD-20, Dated 23.12.2021 (3) General Administrative Department GR No. DIT 065/CR 7/2022/S.4/39, Date-04.11.2022
1. Introduction :
As telecom service providers with the mandate of the Department of
Telecommunications Government of India, the operators are committed to provide coverage,
and increase teledensity in urban areas. The Government of Maharashtra proposed to lay
down a policy dated 4th November, 2022 that would be clear and useful to industry in this
regard.
Government of Maharashtra after examining the issues and problems faced by the
telecom operators and after deliberating on the merits of the same deems it fit to issue these
instructions under the "Telecom Infrastructure Policy 2022" for filing in objections and
suggestions for setting of Telecommunication Cell Site/Base station for provisioning of
telecommunication network in State of Maharashtra.
The Government of Maharashtra has been taking pro-active steps to realize the vision
of the Digital India program in the State. Industry associations & telecom service providers
from time to time have highlighted the various issues which need to be resolved to ensure
speedy augmentation of the telecom infrastructure in the State.
At present, there is no uniformity of rates, procedure and documents required for
granting for Right of Way permission & mobile tower infrastructure permissions within urban
local bodies. There are different sets of regulations are being used by different Urban Local
Bodies. Multiplicity of different local rules, resolutions and agencies and Departments
dealing with permissions is resulting in an avoidable overlap and delays. Yet there is Telecom
Infrastructure Policy in force then applicants have to go to different agencies for NOCs,
payments, permissions even for a single application.
It would be desirable to eliminate this ambiguity and multiplicity of agencies and
designate Directorate of Municipal Administration of Urban Development Department as the
appropriate authority for the implementation of Telecom Infrastructure guidelines within
Urban Local Bodies.
# Page 2
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
Government of India issued notification dated 15.11.2016 for installation of Telecom
infrastructure. The rules are called as Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016 and Indian
Telegraph Right of Way (Amendment) Rules, 2022. These rules inter alia specify the method
of application of by a licensee, points of scrutiny by the appropriate authority before grant of
permission, obligations of licensee in undertaking the work and powers of the appropriate
authority to supervise the work for underground and overhead telegraph infrastructure. It is
proposed to prepare an integrated framework of the State Government for handling issues
related to setting up of telecom infrastructure in the State which is aligned with the rules of
the Government of India referred to above. Hence, the issue of comprehensive guidelines
regarding setting up of telecom infrastructure in the State was under the consideration of the
Government.
2. Government Resolution :
Whereas the Telecom Infrastructure Policy GAD GR No. DIT065/CR7/2022/S4/39,
Date-04.11.2022 in exercise of the powers conferred by the Indian Telegraph Right of Way
Rules, 2016 read with section 520 C of The Mumbai Municipal Corporation act, 1888
(Bombay Act 3 of 1888), sections 450 A of The Maharashtra Municipal Corporations
Act, 1949 (Maharashtra Act no. LIX of 1949) and section 312 A of The Maharashtra
Municipal Councils, Nagarpanchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965 (Maharashtra
Act no. XL of 1965) and in order to bring uniformity in disposal of permission amount in
Urban Local Authorities has been published in the Telecom Infrastructure Policy.
Now therefore in exercise of powers conferred under the Indian Telegraph Right of
Way Rules, 2016 read with above mentioned sections, the State Government of Maharashtra
is hereby pleased to make the following guidelines to bring uniformity, clarity and
simplification in the process of mobile tower installation permission and Right of Way
(RoW) permission to install telecom infrastructure such as Ground Based Tower (GBT),
Ground Based Mast/Monopole, Roof Top Tower (RTT) and Roof Top Pole (RTP)
establishment of poles for 5G, and laying of underground optical fiber cable to licensed
telecom operators and registered infrastructure providers in urban areas of Maharashtra.
3. Objectives :
These guidelines are aimed at creation of robust telecommunication infrastructure with
adequate band width to promote information technology, E-governance, E-commerce,
Convergence of information, Communication and Entertainment sectors, which shall improve
the economy of the state and enhance the quality of life of citizens and ensure development of
urban areas with equity towards the state. The state government intends to use this
Page 2 of 41
# Page 3
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
telecommunication infrastructure to deliver citizen centric services to the citizens so that
she/he can access services in the comfort of their homes without having to access government
office.
4. Title, commencement and application :
(1) These guidelines may be called the Maharashtra Telecom Infrastructure Guidelines for
Urban Local Bodies 2022
(2) They shall come into force from the date of publication.
(3) Directorate of Municipal Administration of Urban Development Department is designated
as the Appropriate Authority to implement and work as Nodal Officer for the activities
involving setting up and maintenance of telecom infrastructure in the Urban Local Body
areas.
5. Definitions :
For the purposes of guidelines, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "Act" means the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (Central Act 13 of 1885);
(b) "Applicant" shall mean an agency who is a telecom or cable infrastructure provider,
registered with the Department of Telecommunication to install new
Telecommunication Infrastructure Towers (TIT) or to lay cable wires either below the
surface of the earth or above the surface of the earth for any communication purposes
recognized under the appropriate law.
(c) "Appropriate Authority" means the authority as defined under clause (b) of rule 2 of
the Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016;
(d) "Cable" shall mean an assembly of one or more insulated conductors or optical fibres
or a combination of both within an enveloping jacket which may be above the surface
of the Earth or below the surface of the Earth and shall be a high-speed physical
medium for transmitting data or information and shall not include those cables
utilized for broadcasting or provision of programming services under the Cable
Television Networks Regulations Act, 1995 (Central Act 7 of 1995)
(e) "Cable duct" shall mean a pipe or tubular hollow structure designed to accommodate
the running of one or more cables within it.
(f) "Government" means the Government of Maharashtra.
(g) "Nodal Officer" for the purpose of these guidelines means,- the Commissioner,
Directorate of Municipal Administration, Mumbai Commissioner or officer
authorized by him.
Page 3 of 41
# Page 4
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
(h) "Permission holder” means any person holding a permission/ licence issued under
these guidelines ;
(i) “Over ground cable infrastructure” means a cable over the ground and includes posts
or other above ground contrivances appliances and apparatus for the purpose of
establishment or maintenance of the cable;
(j) "Permission" means the permission granted by the urban local bodies to an applicant
for the purpose of installing telecommunication infrastructure tower or laying down
optical fibre cables above the surface of the earth or below the surface of the earth in
accordance with the Telecom Infrastructure Policy/guidelines;
(k) "Schedule" means the schedule appended to these Telecom Infrastructure guidelines;
(1) "Telecommunication Infrastructure Tower (TIT)" shall include Ground Based Tower
(GBT), Roof Top Tower (RTT), Roof Top Poles (RTP), Cell Phone Tower (CPT),
Antenna fixtures, fabricated antenna, Tower to install the telephone lines,
Transmission Towers, Cell On Wheels, In-Building Solutions and Micro Sites. But it
shall not include the Antennas installed for domestic purpose, namely Television
Antennas or Dish Antennas;
(m) "Underground cable infrastructure" includes manholes, marker stones, appliances
and apparatus for the purposes of establishment or maintenance of the cables,
(n) “Registered Telecom Infrastructure Provider" are the one who hold valid licence
issued by DoT, Gol.
(0) "Rule" means the Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016; and “Urban Areas”
means areas within the limits of Urban Local Bodies.
(p) Words and expressions used and not defined herein but defined in the Act shall have
the meaning assigned to them in the Act.
6. Applicability /Eligibility :
1) These instructions shall apply to the whole of the State of Maharashtra and shall be
implemented by all Municipal Corporations, Municipal Councils, the appropriate
authorities mentioned in the Telecom Infrastructure Policy 2022.
2) The Guidelines shall be applicable to all telecom licensees and Registered Telecom
Infrastructure Providers (Registered with DOT) within the State.
3) Either by content or by intent, the purpose of extending Right of Way facility is not to
enhance the scope of license of a licensee and such Right of Way permissions shall be
only enabling in nature.
Page 4 of 41
# Page 5
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
4) The concerned Commissioner of Municipal Corporation/ Chief Officers of Municipal
Council/ Nagar Panchayat/Local self-governing bodies shall be the Appropriate
Authority in the areas under its jurisdiction.
7. Survey of the existing underground and overground telecom infrastructure i.e.,
OFC, Cables below the surface of the earth and above the surface of the earth,
mobile towers etc. :
1) In urban areas Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Appropriate Authority shall undertake a
survey as mentioned Point 8 in General Section of State Telecom Infrastructure
Policy 2022.
2) The survey shall identify areas where cables or cable ducts have been laid below and
above the surface of the earth and the agencies responsible for laying such cables or
cable ducts and such a survey shall ordinarily be completed before 31st March 2023
and for telecom infrastructure tower, the survey shall ordinarily be completed before
31st March 2023.
3) The Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Appropriate Authority shall co-ordinate with
telecom infrastructure providers whereas if necessary for survey purposes.
4) The telecommunication infrastructure towers that have previously registered with the
urban local bodies or have remained unregistered shall register themselves with The
Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Appropriate Authority in accordance with the
procedure laid down under these guidelines :
(1) Upon undertaking the survey of cables and cable ducts laid below and
above the surface of the earth, the Commissioner/ Chief Officer/
Appropriate Authority shall identify such empty cable ducts within which
new cables may be accommodated and record such details for the
purposes of scrutinizing any application received under these guidelines.
(2) Based on the survey undertaken, the appropriate authority shall direct
such agencies who have laid down cables or cable ducts prior to the
publication of these guidelines to register themselves, afresh, with the
Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Appropriate Authority in accordance with
the procedure laid down under these guidelines.
(3) Based on the survey undertaken, the Commissioner/ Chief Officer/
Appropriate Authority shall direct such agencies who have installed
telecommunication infrastructure towers prior to the publication of these
guidelines to register themselves, afresh, with the Commissioner/ Chief
Officer/ Appropriate Authority in accordance with the procedure laid Page 5 of 41
# Page 6
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
down under these guidelines. The details of the survey undertaken by the
local bodies for the installation of telecom infrastructure tower and cables
shall be recorded by the local body in such manner as may be appropriate
and the particulars of the survey shall be communicated to the State
Government.
8. Essentiality of Permit :
No person shall erect or re-erect any non- Governmental telecom
infrastructure tower or telecommunication pole structures or accessory rooms or lay
underground cables or overground cables or make alteration or cause the same to be
done without obtaining a separate permission for each such erection or laying from
the Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Appropriate Authority.
Provided, if any person erects a telecommunication tower or lays down cables
(either underground or overground) in the absence of permission under these
guidelines, the Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Appropriate Authority shall initiate
action, after giving notice, for removal of the telecom tower or cables as per law.
9. Application for Installation of Telecommunication Cell Site/Base Station :
I) All applications shall be made to the concern Local Body or Appropriate
Authority by the Telecom Service Provider through GatiShakti/MahaSanchar
only.
II) All applications seeking permission of any appropriate authority to lay the
communication infrastructure shall be submitted by the applicant infrastructure
provider/ Telecom Licensee along with all the particulars and documents specified
below to the concerned Commissioner/Chief Officer/Designated Officer through
Gatishakti/MahaSanchar Portal.
III) The concerned Commissioner/Chief Officer/Designated Officer of the Urban Local
Body shall be single contact person for all clearances.
IV) In order to provide time bound clearances and to address public grievances relating
to installation of Telecom infrastructure and other issues, and also to give
clearances for establishing Telecom Infrastructure over government/semi
government/local body land and buildings, the concerned Chairman of District
Level Telecom Committee (DLTC) is hereby declared the grievance redressal
officer for the Urban Local Bodies. Principal Secretary Information Technology
Page 6 of 41
# Page 7
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
will be the appellate authority for any appeals against the decision of the Chairman
of DLTC.
10. Establishment of Over-ground Telecom Infrastructure Tower or overground
cable infrastructure :
(A) Application :
(1) An applicant shall, for the purposes of establishing overground telecommunication
infrastructure tower or overground cable infrastructure, upon any immoveable
property vested in or under the control or management of any appropriate authority,
make an application, supported by such documents, to that appropriate authority in
such form and manner as may be specified by the said authority.
(2) The applicant shall provide documents for the permission as per SCHEDULE I.
(3) In addition to the documents specified as above, the permission holder shall, while
making the application, give a specific commitment on whether he undertakes to
discharge the responsibility for restoration, to the extent reasonable and prudent, of
the damage that the concerned appropriate authority shall necessarily be put in
consequence of the work proposed to be undertaken.
(4) If the applicant commits to undertake the responsibility of restoration, he shall
submit an estimate of the cost of such restoration which shall be approved by the
authority. Else, the applicant shall deposit the amount equivalent to the cost of
restoration, as specified by the Indian Telegraph Right of Way (Amendment) Rules
2022 specified in Part II of the schedule.
(5) All existing telecom infrastructure towers or overground cable infrastructure shall
register before 31st March 2023 as per the State Telecom Infrastructure policy
2022. By paying fees mentioned in these guidelines. and by submitting structural
safety/ stability certificate from a structural engineer empanelled with the local
authority or any other agency of the State or Central Government. Upon the failure
of the existing telecom infrastructure tower or overground cable infrastructure
provider to pay the fees and register within the stipulated time, the concerned local
authority shall initiate action, after giving notice, for removal of the telecom
infrastructure tower or overground cable infrastructure as per law.
(6) Operation & Maintenance activities in respect of overground telecom infrastructure
tower or overground cable infrastructure shall be undertaken with prior intimation
to Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ appropriate authority. No fresh permissions are
necessary for purely operation & maintenance activities.
Page 7 of 41
# Page 8
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
(7) Provided that any activities that causes change in location of overground telecom
infrastructure tower or overground cable infrastructure will necessitate permission
under guidelines.
(B) Grant of permission by the Appropriate Authority :
(1) The appropriate authority shall examine the application with respect to the following
parameters, namely :
i. the extent of land required for the telecom infrastructure tower or overground
cable infrastructure ;
ii. the location proposed;
iii. the approval issued by the duly authorized officer of the Central Government for
location of the above ground contrivances proposed to be used for transmission
of Radio waves or Hertzian waves ;
iv. the mode of and time duration for execution of the work;
the estimation of expenses that the appropriate authority shall necessarily be put
in consequence of the work proposed to be undertaken;
vi. assessment of the inconvenience that the public is likely to be put to in
consequence of the establishment or maintenance of the telecom infrastructure
tower or overground cable infrastructure, and the measures to mitigate such
inconvenience indicated by the permission holder
vii. certification of the technical design by a structural engineer attesting to the
structural safety of the telecom infrastructure tower or overground cable
infrastructure;
viii. Certification by a structural engineer, of the structural safety of the building, on
which the post or other above ground contrivances is proposed to be established;
Aerial cables which are permitted only for last mile connectivity, do not require
structure certificates for installation.
ix. any other matter, consistent with the provision of these guidelines, connected
with or related to the laying of telecommunication infrastructure tower or
overground cable infrastructure, through a general or special order or guidelines
by the Central Government, State Government or the concerned local authority;
(2) Where the establishment of the overground telecom/ cable infrastructure is over the
immoveable property, vested in the control or management of any local authority which is,
unlikely to be used for any other purpose, the local authority shall be entitled to
compensation for the value of the immoveable property, either once or annually, assessed
Page 8 of 41
# Page 9
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
on such rates as that appropriate authority may, by general order, specify as mentioned in
Indian Telegraph Right of Way (Amendment) Rules 2022 specified in Part III of the
schedule.
(3) The appropriate authority shall within a period not exceeding 60 days from the date of
application :
(a) grant permission on such conditions including, but not limited to, the time, mode of
execution, measures to mitigate public inconvenience or enhance public safety or
structural safety and payment of restoration charge or compensation, subject to the
provisions of the Act and these guidelines; or
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given
an opportunity of being heard on the reasons for such rejection:
Provided further that the permission shall be deemed to have been granted if the
concerned appropriate authority fails to either grant permission under clause (a) or
reject the application under clause (b) and the same shall be communicated in writing
to the applicant not later than five working days after the time specified as above.
(4) Where the concerned appropriate authority accepts the undertaking by the permission
holder to discharge the responsibility to restore the damage that such authority shall
necessarily be put in consequence of the work, the concerned appropriate authority while
granting permission shall seek a bank guarantee for an amount in lieu of expenses for
restoration of such damage, as security for performance in the discharge of the
responsibility.
(5) Formal clearance or permit will not be requires for installation of cell on wheels, The
Cell on Wheel can maximum placed for 30 day with prior intimation to
commissioner/chief officer/ appropriate officer, along with fees depending upon the
location provided all other provisions of concerned department are followed. Where the
deployment is more than 30 days due to any reason, permission from concerned local
authority is required for a period not exceeding 90 days.
11. Fees Structure for installation of Mobile Tower :
The concerned appropriate authority shall charge fees as per SCHEDULE II :
i. In cases, where the land/site utilized for the infrastructure such as tower, mast, pole,
T.V. cable network, OFC, etc. is to be provided by a Government
Department/Agency/Local Authority etc, the annual lease charges for each such site Page 9 of 41
# Page 10
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
shall be as per current Market Rate, or as per relevant government notification or
resolution. Lease charges for a Pit/Manhole shall be Rs.100/- per annum in addition to
annual lease charges. The actual area below the tower / support system shall be
considered for lease charges.
ii. Property Tax shall be independently paid as per respective provisions of Municipal
Corporation Act / Municipal Council Act by concerned TSP in each financial year to
respective Municipal corporations / Municipal Councils.
iii. Validity of the permission for installation of mobile towers shall be coterminous with
the Telecom License period.
iv. For cell on Wheels the fees to be paid shall be maximum of 50% of regular mobile
towers.
v. Other than these fees, no other hidden charges of any nature should be charged for the
cellular sites except property taxes for the tower and appurtenant uses.
vi. The approvals shall be granted by designated Additional Commissioner/Additional
Chief Officer or appropriate officer of concern local body.
vii. If the local body does not give any response to the applications within a period of 60
days from the date of submission, the said applications by the Telecom Operators
shall be deemed to have been approved.
viii. The maximum time limit for giving permission for setting up Telecom Infrastructure
will be 60 days from the date of submission of application along with necessary
permission fees under the regulations, the authority fails to intimate in writing to the
person/ applicant, who has submitted the application; of its refusal or sanction or
sanction with such modifications or directions, the application with its plan and
statements shall be deemed to have been sanctioned, provided nothing shall be
construed to authorise any person to do anything on the site of work in contravention
or against the terms of lease or titles of the land.
ix. Provided that, the permission proposal, for which the permission was applied, is
strictly in the conformity with the requirements of these regulation or regulations
framed in this behalf.
x. If no decision is communicated within 60 days, it will be considered as deemed
permission.
xi. No permission for installation of Telecommunication Cell Site/ Base station shall be
granted on buildings, which are structurally unsafe. If permission for installation of
such structures are granted on buildings, which may be declared as unauthorised at a
later point of time, the Local Authority shall have every right to demolish the said
building through the due process of law. While undertaking such a demolition, the Page 10 of 41
# Page 11
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
local authority will not remove or demolish the same without prior intimation to the
owner of the tower, and the local authority will not be liable for loss of the tower as a
consequence of demolition of the unauthorised building. The operators shall
indemnify Local Authority to this effect.
xii. Notwithstanding anything, Local Authority may require demolition/ removal of
Telecommunication Cell Site put on such illegal buildings and structures after issuing
an advance notice of 30 days to the concerned Telecom Service Provider.
xiii. Any complaint concerning ILLEGAL USE OR CONSTRUCTION of the building,
location of the tower or other complaints/queries of any nature regarding the
installation of telecommunication equipment, the Local body shall intimate the
concerned Telecom Operator of the same with a direction to resolve the matter under
intimation to the Local body.
xiv. The Licensees shall try to share the towers for fixing their respective antennas
provided that the prescribed conditions are duly fulfilled so as to ensure curtailing of
multiple towers and optimizing the use of the existing ones.
xv. The conditions for DG sets used for mobile towers shall be as per the provisions under
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the Noise Pollution (Regulation and control)
Rules, 2000 as amended from time to time.
12. Obligations of permission holder in undertaking work :
The permission holder shall ensure that –
1) Prior to the commencement of establishment and maintenance of telecom
infrastructure tower or over ground cable infrastructure and at all times, the measures
to mitigate public inconvenience and ensure public safety, including structural safety
of such telecommunication infrastructure tower or overground cable infrastructure
are implemented;
2) Th work of establishment and maintenance of over ground telecom/cabl
infrastructure is carried out in accordance with the conditions specified in the grant
of permission by the appropriate authority.
13. Guidelines for installation of Roof top based Infrastructure :
1) Express permission from the building owner shall be obtained. The pre-fabricated
structure shall be temporary in nature and shall not be an inseparable part of the roof
top.
Page 11 of 41
# Page 12
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
2) The height of the antenna (i.e. height of building plus height of tower should be as per
submitted specifications and should not violate the directions and the limit prescribed
by Appropriate Authority in this regard).
3) The structural safety has to be ensured by each private operator individual who should
obtain the certificate from a certified structural engineer. It shall be the responsibility
of the operator to ensure that the buildings are structurally safe and sound and are
capable of taking the load of antenna and pre-fabricated structures.
14. Guidelines for installation of mobile towers by private telecom service
providers in the premises of government offices or government land :
1) The Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Competent Officer of the concerned Government/
Semi-government Office where the Government land/building is located would be the
Appropriate Authority concurrently for according permissive sanctions for allowing
annual lease of Government land/building in consultation with head of the concerned
Department, Board, Corporation, Societies, Schools, Colleges, Hospitals, Anganwadi
Centres etc.. The below mentioned guidelines govern the matters relating to the
installation of mobile/telecommunication towers in Government/PSU land and
buildings by Telecom Infrastructure Providers.
2) All applications for seeking permission of any Appropriate Authority for the
installation of mobile/telecommunication towers in Government/PSU Local Body
land and buildings shall be submitted by the applicant, along with the prior written
consent from the Appropriate Authority having legitimate right over the land, and
with (i) one time Charges for right of use, and (ii) furnish the Performance Bank
Guarantee as a refundable security for restoration of sites and (iii) annual lease
charges on the online portal to the concerned Commissioner/ Chief Officer/
Competent Officer. The above said Officer will meet with inputs from all concerned
and decide the applications and convey the decision within a maximum time period of
30 days.
3) The tower being constructed at Government/ semi- Government/ local body
land/Building if is to be shared with and other Telecom Infrastructure
Providers/Service Providers in future as per Technical feasibility. The Telecom
Infrastructure Providers/Service Providers should seek permission from the concerned
Authority before sharing infrastructure.
4) Annual Lease Charges shall be payable to the department who owns the land and
buildings as per charges defined under relevant rules.
Page 12 of 41
# Page 13
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
5) Permit for installation of Ground Based Mast (Tower)/Roof Top tower on the
land/buildings belonging to the State Government offices/ semi- Government/ local
body / PSU will be issued by Concerned Officers in accordance as per the provisions
of this guidelines. The guidelines in the matter issued by Government of
India/Government of Maharashtra from time to time shall also be applicable.
6) Telecom Infrastructure Provider/ Service Providers shall have no right or claim over
any Government Building/premises, in the light of this guidelines for granting
permission for installing Ground Based Mast (Tower)/Roof Top Tower. It shall be the
discretion of Commissioners / Chief Officer/ Competent Officer to take appropriate
decision for allowing the installation of Ground Based Mast (Tower)/Roof Top Tower
on lease rent basis. This permissive sanction does not force any department to grant
permission.
7) Technical feasibility and structural stability should be taken in to account head of
office before leasing out the building roof tops. Future expansion/extension of
building/premises should be kept in mind.
8) All such installations should be incompliance to DoT. Gol norms and related
instructions issued by Gol and State Govt. from time to time.
9) Head of Office shall enter into an agreement with Telecom Infrastructure Provider/
Service Providers before leasing out land or roof top space of the building.
10) Damage cause to the building/assets/land if any, shall be rectified by the Telecom
Infrastructure Provider/ Service Providers to bring back to the original condition and
to the satisfaction of the authorities concerned. The Telecom Infrastructure Provider/
Service Providers will be solely responsible for any damage/losses to the
property/people due to any accidents occurring due to the Tower.
11) Leasing of premises or buildings to Telecom Infrastructure Provider/ Service
Providers should not be detrimental to the daily routine activities of the office or
officers concerned.
12) The Fee collected by the Appropriate Authority on a/c of administrative expenses for
examination of application as also the lease charges levied collected on a/c of usage of
land/site of Government Department shall be deposited in the State Treasury/
concerned departments treasury.
15. Guidelines for installations of in-building solutions (IBS)/ microcell in
government building :
1) The in-building systems may be set-up in buildings to obtain good coverage and
capacity to the mobile network inside the building by ensuring that the signals don't
Page 13 of 41
# Page 14
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
have to penetrate thick walls. The infrastructure required to being installed requires
extensive wiring in building which could be internal or external based on the
aesthetical requirement of the owner. This solution is beneficial to the mobile users as
well as mobile operators as it reduces the load of the mobile towers and gives
coverage to the mobile users. In this regard, the following guidelines shall be
followed.
2) Identification selection of Government buildings for in-building solution/microcell
would be done by the concerned department and request for installing IBS can be
communicated to the Telecom Service Provider who in-turn shall conduct a survey to
see the possibility of installing IBS in the said premises/building.
3) The permission for setting such a facility would be given by the concerned Head of
department of the building and issue enabling order to allow such installations. In
view of requirement of exterior/ interior wiring for in-building solution, the line plan
should be got approved by the maintenance agency for electrical services for the said
building. The service provider would also look into the security considerations of the
Government offices.
16. Utility Structures of the Government for Aerial Optical Fibre Cable laying :
1) Right of Way (ROW) for Aerial OFC (Overhead Telegraph line) laying will be
encouraged and promoted in the areas where underground fibre is difficult such as in
the hill areas, congested localities, dense population, slum areas etc.
2) In case Aerial OFC (Overhead Telegraph line) is established over the immovable
property, vested in the control or management of any appropriate authority, then in
such cases, one-time compensation shall be payable for the value of the immovable
property, not exceeding one thousand rupees per Kilometre (One Time Charge) of the
over ground telegraph line established.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| For establishment of overground telegraph infrastructure | (i) One thousand rupees per kilometre for establishment of overground telegraph line. (ii) Nil for establishment of poles, for installation of small cells and telegraph line, on the immovable property vested in, or under control or management of appropriate central authority. (iii) One thousand rupees per pole for establishment of poles, for installation of small cells and telegraph line, on the immovable property vested in, or under control or management of appropriate authority, other than appropriate central authority. |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 14 of 41
# Page 15
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
3) Use of Street Furniture for the deployment of the Telecom Infrastructure i.e. aerial fibre, T.V. Cables, Small cells etc will be made available across the State by Appropriate Authority as per prescribed conditions at places such as bus stop shelters, lampposts, or traffic lights, owned by municipalities, to help small cell site deployment for 5G rollout.
17. Powers of the Appropriate Authority to supervise the work :
1) The concerned appropriate authority may supervise the establishment and
maintenance of telecommunication infrastructure tower or over ground cable
infrastructure to ascertain if the conditions imposed in the grant of permission are
observed by the permission holder.
2) The concerned appropriate authority may, on the basis of such supervision, impose
such other reasonable conditions, as it may think fit.
3) If the concerned appropriate authority comes to the conclusion that the permission
holder has wilfully violated any of the conditions for grant of permission, it may
withdraw, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the permission granted to the
permission holder:
Provided no action shall be taken under sub-rule unless the permission holder
has been given notice, and an opportunity of being heard. The permission holder
shall be given a period of 30 days to remedy violations identified by the Authority.
18. Maintenance of telecommunication infrastructure tower or over ground cable infrastructure :
1) The permission holder shall inform the Appropriate Authority in case of removal
or translocation the telecommunication infrastructure tower or over ground cable
infrastructure.
2) In the event the Local Authority/ Urban Local Body or any other agency of the
State Government or Central Government seeks to widen or modify the roads
abutting which the telecommunication infrastructure tower or over ground cable
infrastructure of the permission holder exists, such permission holder shall
coordinate with such agency for removal or shifting of the telecom infrastructure
tower or over ground cable infrastructure.
19. Penalties:
Any other violation apart from Electromagnetic Field (EMF) radiation being
deemed by the appropriate authority as a violation on part of the licensee, the same
shall be dealt with by issuing a notice to the licensee. The duration to respond to the
notice shall not be less than 7 working days. In case the appropriate authority is not
Page 15 of 41
# Page 16
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
satisfied with the response, the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard by the
District Level Telecom Committee. In case the District Level Telecom Committee
concurs with the appropriate authority's decision then appropriate action shall be
initiated by the appropriate authority against the licensee.
1) The permission holder shall be responsible for restoration of any damages caused to
any public or private property during the course of erection of telecommunication
infrastructure tower or over ground cable infrastructure. In addition, the
commissioner/ chief officer/ appropriate authority may levy penalty of 2 times of
regular charges per meter per year or per unit as applicable.
2) In case of any untoward incidences or accidents arising due to negligence on the part
of permission holder during erection of telecom infrastructure tower or over ground
cable infrastructure or due to failure in structural stability of the building on which the
telecom infrastructure tower is erected, the commissioner/chief officer/ appropriate
authority shall initiate criminal proceedings against the permission holder and take
necessary action as per law, in addition to levy of penalty.
3) Punitive Action in case of Violation of EMF radiation limits set by Central Govt. shall
be addressed to Central Govt. or DoT as per provisions of Central Govt. Guidelines.
4) Principal Secretary (IT) will be the Final Authority for dispute resolution.
20. Regularization/Compounding :
Application for obtaining clearance for the existing unauthorised mobile towers
shall be submitted till 31/03/2023, after which the matter would be taken as per laid
down procedure. Once the application is submitted within due time, the operation of the
Mobile Tower shall not be discontinued till disposal of the application by the concerned
local Authority. We direct all Urban Local Bodies not to take coercive steps and not to
seal the Towers sites and not to disconnect the electricity without the concurrence of
Principal Secretary (IT). In case the local authority declines clearance for any existing
unauthorised mobile towers an appeal can be filed before the concerned Chairman of
District Level Telecom Committee (DLTC) Principal Secretary Information Technology
will be the appellate authority for any appeals against the decision of the Chairman of
DLTC.
For the regularisation of unauthorised Mobile/Telecom Towers which were
installed before implementation of these guidelines subject to the fulfilment of
conditions applied for authorised tower thereof and payment by following formula. This
is one time relaxation, which will be valid till 31/03/2023 from the implementation date
Page 16 of 41
# Page 17
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
of these guidelines. For this purpose the application for regularisation shall be made and
processed on MahaSanchar Portal only.
Formula : -
No. of Years existing period of Mobile Towers × [Applicable Fee for Permission + Basic Property Tax (excluding penalty* and interest)]
* For the purpose of above Penalty formula rebate shall be granted as per section
152-1A of The Maharashtra Municipal Corporations and section 216 A of The Mumbai
Municipal Corporation, section 167 A of The Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar
Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Second Amendment) Act, 2018 (Mah. Act No.
LIII of 2018) for this purpose to avail benefit of this scheme the applicant Telecom
Infrastructure Service Provider must withdraw any pending suit unconditionally. For
this purpose take proper approval of concern Local Body's administrator or general
body if there is necessary.
All ULB's shall rationalise Property Tax and it should be not more than 15% of
annual rateable value. This will be applicable from 01.04.2023.
For the purpose of Mobile Tower erection previously Security Deposit has been
collected, there is no provision of security deposit in ROW Rules, so security deposit
shall be refunded or will be adjusted in property tax before 31.03.2023.
21. Establishment and Maintenance of Underground cable infrastructure (OFC) :
(A) Application :
1) An applicant shall, for the purposes of installation of cable infrastructure/ laying of
cables under any immovable property vested in or under the control or management
of the appropriate authority make an online application, supported by documents as
per SCHEDULE III.
2) An applicant shall provide Indicative Action Plan and layout of the OFC /ducts to be
laid down in a year on or before to 1st of April each year, at least 6 months in
advance and get it approved from the appropriate authority. Once such layout/plan is
received by the authority, the authority will call a meeting of all the
operators/applicants and after mutual understanding will fix the route, distance etc. to
be allotted to which operator in order to avoid repetition of grant of permission and
frequent damages to the roads and to avoid the inconvenience to the public. In this
case the operators who got the approval will be entitled for the payment of
ROW/Restoration and other charges as mentioned in SCHEDULE IV.
3) That, while newly constructing and repairing of the roads foot Paths etc in the Page 17 of 41
# Page 18
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
jurisdiction of local bodies all utility holders including telecom operators shall be
called for doing the RoW/Ducting work who is interested to do so for himself and for
others also so that frequently granting permission and frequently digging, excavating
the roads and putting public in trouble etc would be avoided.
4) In this case all interested utility holders will prepare their annual plan of ducts to be
laid down every year and will submit it to the concerned authority before 31stJuly of
every year and the Appropriate Authority will call a joint meeting of all such
operators, utility holders and will obtain their expression of interest till the end of
first week of August. Out of all these applicants one operators/utility holders should
be selected for doing this work at the rate of one third of the amount as defined after
analysing the expression of interest by the end of 15th August every year.
5) In this case the selected applicant will lay down all the ducts one for their
organisation and other for the use of other applicant from which the local bodies will
be entitled to recover per kilometre or per meter annual rent on prorata basis
depending upon the rates as defined.
6) In any case the local bodies must give all permissions to the selected applicant on or
before 31stof August of that year. If such permissions are not given within this
stipulated time the same will be deemed to be granted provided it is not otherwise
rejected by the authority with proper reason of rejection and that too within five days
from the last date of granting permissions i.e. 31st of Aug every year.
7) Provided any applicant seeking permission to lay cables under these guidelines may
submit an affidavit to the commissioner/ chief officer/ appropriate authority declaring
compliance with these guidelines and acknowledgement of payment of the
application fees to the Appropriate Authority / urban local body. The commissioner/
chief officer/ appropriate authority shall permit the applicant to lay cables provided
that all the documents required are submitted within 60 days from the date of
submission of the affidavit.
8) Provided further that the applicant is exempted from fee under these guidelines if he
has paid fees to the Urban Local Body/Appropriate Authority for establishment of
cable infrastructure or laying of cable through MoU or other instruments with the
respective Urban Local Body/ Appropriate Authority, prior to the commencement of
these guidelines.
9) Once the "Call Before u Dig" (CBuD) Mobile Application is activated, all digging
agencies to mandated by State Govt. to do any type of digging only after prior
intimation through "Call Before u Dig" (CBuD) App and as per its terms and
conditions.
Page 18 of 41
# Page 19
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
(1) All underground utility/asset owner agencies viz. Electricity Cables, Water-pipe.
Gas-pipe, Sewerage etc. to be directed by State Govt :
To register contact details/ escalation matrix of their local/zonal/district officers in charge in the "Call Before u Dig" App for receiving SMS/email notifications.
To direct owners of excavators, public works contractors to download and register themselves on CBUD app and educate the drivers of these machines To be mandated to respond to excavation requests/messages received on "Call Before u Dig" App and take actions accordingly, even if they have mapped or not mapped their assets.
To GIS map their assets on PM GatiShakti NMP as a layer (https://nad.ncog.gov.in/gatishakti/login)
(2) All agencies carrying out excavation in public lands to be mandated by State Govt:
To do any type of digging only after prior intimation through "Call Before u Dig" App and as per its terms and conditions.
To use the App before commencing any type of digging anywhere in the State.
(3) All ULBS to be directed to include Point 2 in the approval letter format, while
granting approval for any type of digging anywhere in the ULB area.
Every applicant shall pay following fees :
In cases where telecom cable such as optical fibre cables etc. have to be laid
underground by any method such as duct & conduits, tunnelling core etc. the service
provider will be expected to conduct the entire operation of laying the cable fibre
and restoring the site & all related infrastructure to its original & useable condition
at their own cost and within a period of 30 days. In case, the service provider/
infrastructure provider chooses not to rehabilitate the site/ infrastructure or is unable
to do so within a period of 30 days after laying the infrastructure the concerned
Government Department/ Agency/Local Authority shall execute the rehabilitation of
the site/road by levying the charges as per SCHEDULE IV:
Administrative and Reinstatement charges including other charges are to be
paid online by applicants before granting permission. Reinstatement charges will be
decided as per type of the road mentioned in SCHEDULE IV
1) All existing underground cable infrastructure shall register till 31/03/2023 from the
date of publication of these guidelines, by paying fees prescribed as above and
completion of compliances under this section. Provided the applicant is exempted
from fees under this section if he has paid fees under existing MoU/agreement with
respective Urban Local Body/Appropriate Authority. Prior to the commencement of
these Guidelines.
Page 19 of 41
# Page 20
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
2) In the event an applicant seeks permission to lay cables below the surface of the earth
on those roads whose ownership cuts across two or more local bodies, the applicant
shall make two separate applications in accordance with these guidelines.
3) Permission and bank guarantee are necessary for operation and maintenance
activities in respect of underground cable infrastructure that are likely to damage to
public property.
(B) Grant of permission by Appropriate Authority / urban local body :
1) The concerned commissioner/ chief officer/ appropriate authority shall examine the
application with respect to the following parameter, namely :
a) The route planned for the proposed underground cable infrastructure and the possible
interference, either in the establishment or maintenance of such cable infrastructure
with any other public infrastructure that may have been laid along the proposed route;
b) The mode of execution ;
c) The time duration for execution of the work and the time of the day that the work is
proposed to be executed ;
d) The estimation of expenses that the Appropriate Authority / urban local body shall
necessarily be put in consequence of the work proposed to be undertaken;
e) The responsibility for restoration of any damage that the local authority/ urban local
body may necessarily be put in consequence of the work proposed to be undertaken;
f) Assessment of measures to ensure public safety and inconvenience that the public is
likely to be put to in consequence of the work proposed and the measures to mitigate
such inconvenience indicated by the permission holder; and
g) Any other matter, consistent with the provisions of the Act and these guidelines,
connected with or relative to the establishment or maintenance of underground cable
infrastructure, through a general or special order, by the Central Government, State
Government or the Appropriate Authority / urban local body.
2) The Appropriate Authority shall, within a period not exceeding 60 days from the
date of application made.
(i) grant permission on such conditions including but not limited to, the time, mode of
execution, measures to mitigate public inconvenience or enhance public safety and
payment of restoration charge as may be specified, subject to the provisions of the
Act and Rules made there under and these guidelines; or
(ii) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing ;
Page 20 of 41
# Page 21
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been
given an opportunity of being heard on the reasons for such rejection;
Provided further that the permission shall be deemed to have been granted if
the Appropriate Authority fails to either grant permission under (i) or reject the
application under (ii); and the same shall be communicated in writing to the applicant
not later than five working days after the period specified above.
3) Where the Appropriate Authority accepts the undertaking by the applicant to
discharge the responsibility to restore the damage that such authority shall
necessarily be put in consequence of the work, the Appropriate Authority while
granting permission under clause (i) of sub clause (2) shall seek a bank guarantee
for an amount in lieu of expenses or restoration of such damage, as security for
performance in the discharge of the responsibility.
4) Upon the grant of permission, the commissioner/chief officer/ appropriate authority
shall within fifteen days from the date of grant of such permission publish the order
granting permission, the route where the cables has been permitted to be laid and
any other information on the website of the respective urban local body.
5) The Appropriate Authority shall not charge any fee other that those prescribed
above from the permission holder for establishment of underground cable
infrastructure.
(C) Duration of permission :
1) It shall be contingent on the extent of land or road sought to be dug but shall not
exceed 9 months from the date of grant of permission.
2) If the applicant is unable to lay down cables within the duration determined by the
concerned appropriate authority under sub-clause (i), he/she shall be required to
make an application for renewal on the single window platform and shall specify the
reasons for non-completion of works under the previous permission.
3) No permission for renewal shall be granted by the concerned urban local body for a
period exceeding 60 days and an application for renewal shall be accompanied by the
fee. Provided that the applicant may be granted renewal for an additional period of
three months if laying of cables was delayed due to force majeure events.
(D) Obligations of permission holder in undertaking work :
(1) The permission holder shall ensure that
a. Prior to the commencement of work of laying the underground cable infrastructure
and at all times during the execution of work, the measures to mitigate public
inconvenience and provide for public safety are implemented,; and
Page 21 of 41
# Page 22
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
b. The work of laying underground cable infrastructure is carried out in accordance
with the conditions specified in the grant of permission by the appropriate
authority.
(2) The permission holder shall ensure provision of positional intelligence, through
appropriate technology, of all underground cable infrastructures to enable the
Appropriate Authority to obtain real time information on its location.
(3) The permission holder shall comply with the technical guidelines provided as
below
(4) Licensee will carry out Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) survey along the route
where the duct has to be laid for detection of existing utility. The data of utility
collected through GPR survey would be unconditionally shared with relevant
Authority free of cost.
(5) Permission granted to the applicant licensee will not be transferable and will be
applicable only for the period for which it has been granted.
(6) If required the concerned Department/Authority can direct the applicant
licensee to change the optical fibre cable in stipulated time period or shift the cable
to other area and the applicant licensee shall be bound to do the same for which all
the expenses would be borne by the applicant company.
(7) The State Government shall not be responsible for any damage to Optical Fibre
Cable and resultant losses, if any, during the course of official duty by any of their
employees.
(8) If the applicant licensee wants to utilize the existing electric poles or street light
poles, the same can be allowed by the concerned Corporations/Municipalities/
Department subject to the payment of fees/usage charges prescribed from time to
time and fulfilment of terms & conditions.
(9) Responsibility of public safety will lie with licensee during establishment or
post establishment of Ground Based/Roof Top Tower/ Mast/ Pole and laying of
cable, during its maintenance or other related activities. The licensee shall take
all necessary safety steps & measures while executing the work and licensee will
indemnify the local Authority against any accident and damage caused to life or
property during execution and post execution.
(10) Licensee or any 3rd party will not be allowed to display any advertisement on the
Mast and Pole without permission of the relevant local authority.
(11) The pits /trenches shall be reinstated within 72 hours after completion of the work
up-to satisfaction of relevant local Authority failing which the concerned Local
Authority will invoke the bank guarantee and will get the restoration work done.
Page 22 of 41
# Page 23
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
(12) In case of any damage to the essential services i.e. water supply, sewerage system
and telecommunication lines, electricity supply etc., it will be the responsibility of
the licensee to get the services restored from the concerned Local Authority within
24 hours and the cost so incurred would be borne by the applicant licensee.
(13) The area required for laying of Optical Fibre Cable etc., installing a Ground Based
Mast and a ground Based Towers/ Poles, will be allotted subject to the conditions
that it will not obstruct the movement of the traffic (vehicular & pedestrian), roads
and services.
(14) Ground Based Towers/ Mast/ Poles installed by the licensee can be used by Local
Authority for lighting the road and licensee will not be paid any fee for the same.
All the related equipment for the purpose will be provided by the concerned
appropriate Authority and the electricity bill for the same will be borne by the
concerned local Authority. However, the licensee will be responsible for the
installation and maintenance of street light points on Ground Based
Mast/Pole/Tower.
(E) Technical Standards and parameters :
1. Technical Parameters to be followed by the infrastructure service providers while laying the cables below the surface of the earth.
Laying down of underground cables/OFC
a. The applicant shall carry out the work by using Horizontal Directional Drilling
method only so as to minimize the damage and to cause minimum inconvenience to
the public.
b. The cable shall ordinarily be laid below the footpath or berm or the shoulder of
the road.
c. The top of the casing or conduit pipe containing the cables shall be at least 1.6
meter below the top surface subject to at least 0.3 meter below the drains inverts and
other utility supplies.
d. Pits of 2 meter x 1 meter and 1.5 meter deep, or of lower size shall be made at a
convenient distance but not less than 80 meter, centre-to- centre, for laying cables.
However, in case of special site condition variable depth or dimensions may be
permitted by the Nodal officer depending on the site conditions
e. The name of the permission holder shall be indicated on the cables boldly.
Page 23 of 41
# Page 24
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
2. For Construction of RCC Manhole :
1. The structure of the manhole will be designed as per the norms of Indian Road
Congress (IRC). The top level of the manhole will be as per existing road level and
whenever the road level is changed the changed, the agency will be bound to finish it to
the road level at its own expenses.
2. The agency will be responsible for maintenance and upkeep of the manholes from time
to time and will be responsible for obstruction free flow of traffic and loss of any
Government or Private property during and after the construction of manhole.
3. If any manhole comes in the way of approved alignment of any proposed water supply,
sewerage or any other service the agency will be bound to shift or remove the
manhole/cable. The agency will make changes in the location/alignment of manhole at
its own cost wherever required by the Government/Local Authority and will be bound
to obey any directions of the Government/Local Authority issued from time to time.
Installation of telecom tower shall be allowed as per advisory guidelines issued by
Department of Telecommunications, Government of India of State Governments from
time to time.
(F) Powers of Appropriate Authority to supervise the work :
(1) The appropriate authority may supervise the execution of work to ascertain if the
co ons imposed in the grant of permission are observed by the permission lder.
(2) The concerned appropriate authority may, on the basis of such supervision, impose
such other reasonable conditions as it may think fit.
(3) If the concerned appropriate authority comes to the conclusion that the permission
holder has wilfully violated any of the conditions for grant of permission, it may
forfeit, in full or in part, the bank guarantee submitted by the permission holder and
withdraw the permission granted to the permission holder, for reasons to be recorded
in iting ;
Provided that no action shall be taken under this sub-rule unless the permission
holder has been given an opportunity of being heard.
(G) Maintenance of Cables :
(1) The permission holder shall not remove or translocate the cables without the
prior approval of the concerned local authority.
(2) In the event the Local Authority/ Urban Local Body or any other agency of the
State Government or Central Government seeks to widen or modify the roads
below which the cables of the permission holder exist, such permission holder
Page 24 of 41
# Page 25
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
shall coordinate with such agency for removal or shifting of the cable ducts.
(3) The permission holder shall be notified by Appropriate Authority / Urban Local
Body or any other agency of the State Government or Central Government, 30
days prior, if any coordination is required to reposition the under-ground assets
to accommodate the requirements of government projects and developmental
works.
(4) In the event the cable ducts laid down by the permission holder is required to be
removed for the purposes provided for under sub- clause (ii), he shall apply for
permission, afresh under these guidelines for laying cables in another location
but shall be exempted from payment of fees or furnishing bank guarantee.
(H) Penalties :
(1) The permission holder shall be responsible for restoration of any damages
caused to any public or private property during the course of laying cables. In
addition, the commissioner/chief officer/ appropriate authority may levy
minimum penalty of2 times of regular charges per meter per year for causing
such damage.
(2) In case of any untoward incidences or accidents arising due to negligence on the
part of permission holder during laying of underground cable infrastructure, the
commissioner/chief officer/appropriate authority shall initiate criminal
proceedings against the permission holder and take necessary action as per law,
in addition to levy of penalty.
22. Right of Way (ROW) using Street Light or Electricity Poles or Street furniture :
1. The Applicant will make the agreement with the concerned local body or electricity
Distribution Company (DISCOM) for the utilization of the electric poles/ distributed
network system.
2. Energy Department / DISCOMs shall not be held responsible for any loss to the cable or
the commercial operation loss to the Applicant due to theft or for any other reason
whatsoever. The safety of the cable shall be entirely with the Applicant.
3. The Applicant will submit application with the right of usage of the utility pole in the
offices of local authority. If the local authority finds the application in compliance with
the entire requirement, then will issue the permit to the applicant within the prescribed
time.
4. If the route of aerial cabling is covering more than one jurisdiction, the Applicant will
apply separately to the local authorities of the respective jurisdiction for issue of permit.
Page 25 of 41
# Page 26
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
Aerial (Over-Ground) OFC Laying :
---------------------------------------------------------
| Sr. No. | Particulars | Administrative Fees (Rs.) |
|  | Compensation one Time | Rs.1000 per km (One Time Charge) |
|  | Rental per Pole per year | Rs 100 |
---------------------------------------------------------
Compensation :
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Item | Amount |
| Establishment of underground telegraph infrastructure | Nil |
| Establishment of poles for installation of small cells and telegraph line | Nil |
| Usage of street furniture for installation of small cells and telegraph line. | (i) For installation of small cells : Three hundred rupees per annum for urban area and one hundred and fifty rupees per annum for rural areas per street furniture. (ii) For installation of telegraph line : One hundred rupees per annum per street furniture. |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Above rates shall be applicable to private cable T.V./network also.
Competent/appropriate Authority of Local Urban Body shall decide fees for cable T.V.
overground infrastructure who are using street furniture. Competent/appropriate Authority
shall remove illegal cables/wires which deface city. For regularization of cables/wires
competent/appropriate Authority may charge fees and penalties in the line of (ROW) rules or
frame local policy for cable T.V. network in specific.
23. Implementation :
1. Charges for restoration shall be applied as per Telegraph Right of Way (Amendment)
Rules, 2022 of part II.
2. The site or surface of road/streets will be restored to its original position by the licensee
within 30 days.
3. In order to avoid repeated digging on the same routes, if possible the 1st incumbent
TSPS/IPs is free to lay voluntarily extra ducts/conduits with extra capacity so as to take
Page 26 of 41
# Page 27
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
care of future needs. The capacity / excess capacity can be commercialized by the
incumbent TSPS/IPs with suitable mutual agreements with the respective local
Authority. However, creation of the excess capacity by the 1st incumbent TSPS/IPs shall
not be a precondition for giving Right to Way clearances. The Local Authority may
consider laying ducts/conduits at the time of construction of roads to facilitate laying
OFCs Cables for which suitable charges could be imposed.
4. Applicant will give a notice of 15 days with route details prior to trenching for fresh or
maintenance / repair works. A separate Performance Bank Guarantee for maintenance /
repair work will be furnished by the licensee.
5. Operator shall be responsible for any accident or damage due to his act, omissions or
negligence.
24. General Restrictions :
1. Permission for Right of Way for Laying of Optical Fibre Cable etc., installation of
Ground Based Mast/Poles/Tower will not be granted at location where it will cause
disruptions in services and facilities.
2. Permission for installation of Ground Based Mast/Poles/Tower will not be granted for a
location where Mast/Pole/Tower can cause obstruction /hindrance to vehicular as well as
pedestrian traffic.
3. Permission will also be subjected to all statutory restrictions by any Act or Law in force
with respect to Telecom infrastructure.
4. The agreement shall be done between the licensee and concerned local Authority
regarding compliance of all the terms & conditions.
5. In case of any dispute between the licensee and the Urban Local Authority the concerned
Chairman of District Level Telecom Committee (DLTC) is hereby declared the grievance
redressal officer. Principal Secretary Information Technology will be the appellate
authority for any appeals against the decision of the Chairman of DLTC.
6. The permission shall be coterminous with the validity of the Telecom License of the
Telecom Operator.
7. Telecom installation is lifeline installation & a critical infrastructure in mobile
communication. It is treated as an essential service & therefore sealing of mobile towers/
disconnection of electricity may not be restored to without the consent of respective
TERM Cell of DoT in respect of the EMF related issues. However, if the matter is related
to structural safety of mobile tower, the Commissioner/ Chief Officer/ Designated Officer
may take suitable action as it deems fit on receipt of a report from Deputy Engineer /
Junior Engineer/Any Competent Officer of Municipal Corporation/ Municipal Council.
Page 27 of 41
# Page 28
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
8. The permission holder intimate the Appropriate Authority issuing return notice of his
intention of dismantling mobile tower. The Appropriate Authority after receipt of such
notice shall grant permission within period of 30 days, failing within permission holder
shall dismantle the same and observe all local applicable rules and regulations for
dismantling mobile tower.
10. If the installed Telecom Infrastructure is found to be without appropriate approvals or the
infrastructure providers has not deposited the requisite fee to the appropriate authority,
the appropriate authority shall have the power to direct the licensee/ TSPs/ IPs for
removal of the said Telecom infrastructure giving prior notice.
11. These guidelines shall be applicable to all appropriate Authorities within the state of
Maharashtra including the various development Special planning authorities, Industrial
development Corporations/ authorities, Other statutory Authorities & also the Local
Bodies including Municipal corporations, Municipal Councils, Nagar panchayats etc.
constituted by the state legislature. The appropriate authority shall exercise the powers
under these guidelines on an application for laying of cables & installation of Telecom
infrastructure.
12. If there is a conflict between the Act and the Rules & Regulations; the Act will prevail,
and if there is a conflict between the Act, Rules and Regulations on the one hand, and the
Guidelines on the other, the former will prevail and the latter becomes ultra vires.
25. State Level Telecom Committee & District Level Telecom Committee State Level Telecom Committee (SLTC) :
Under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary IT, a State Level Telecom Committee
shall be formed to resolve the issues arising due to escalation by the Telecom
Infrastructure Company against the decision of District Level Committee. The Committee
shall also be responsible to issue advisories and amendments from time to time
considering the changing business scenario and considering the provisions of the related
act and rules of GoI. The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Additional Chief / Principal Secretary IT Chairman
Additional Chief / Principal Secretary UD-2 Member
Additional Chief/ Principal Secretary Revenue Member
Additional Chief/ Principal Secretary RDD Member
Principal Secretary Forests Department Member
Director IT Member
Commissioner/Director, DMA Member-Convener
Page 28 of 41
# Page 29
Government Resolution No.: Sankirna-2021/C.R. 242/UD-20
Additional members from other Stakeholder ULB's/Departments/Technical
Organizations / Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) / Infrastructure Providers (IPs) will be
co-opted on need basis.
District Level Telecom Committee (DLTC) :
Under the Chairmanship of District Collector a District Level Telecom Committee
shall resolve all issues within a period of thirty calendar days of initial receipt of reference
from Dispute Resolution Officers/LSB/TSPs/IPs as the case may be. This Committee shall
meet at least once a quarter. This Committee shall report the unresolved issues to the State
Level Telecom Committee not later than thirty calendar days from the date of decision by
the District Level Telecom Committee. The members of the Committee shall be
representatives from Local Bodies (Municipal Corporation/Municipality/Nagar Panchayat /
Development Authority), District Joint Commissioner UDD, Law Enforcement Authorities,
Infrastructure Providers & Telecom Service Providers.
This Government resolution of Maharashtra Government is available at the website
# Page 30
# Page 31
# Page 32
# Page 33
# Page 34
# Page 35
# Page 36
# Page 37
# Page 38
# Page 39
# Page 40
# Page 41