# Page 1
In respect of Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Wab officers / staff working under the Centrally Sponsored Smart City Mission.
Government of Maharashtra
the Urban Development Department
Government Correctional Certificate No: SmartC-0226 / Q.No.18 / NV-32
Martyr Rajguru Chowk, Madam Cama Marg,
Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032.
Date: May 99, 2026.
Read: - Urban Development Department Government Decision No. SmartC-2026, / Q. No.18 / NV-32D 22.04.2026
Government Corrigendum - Paragraph in the Preamble to the Government Decision with reference to. The Government was considering the issue of "Directives to Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) and other Directors and Officers / Staff working under the Centrally Sponsored Smart Cities Mission" mentioned in Section 2. Instead, it should read, "The Government was under consideration to issue directions to officers / staff regarding Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) operating under the Centrally Sponsored Smart Cities Mission."
The context of the government decision. 1 states "The Chairman, Smart City SPV and other Directors, Smart City SPV are being relieved and their powers are being vested in the Commissioner of the concerned Municipal Corporation." Instead, it should read, "The powers of the Chairman, Smart City, are being vested in the Commissioner of the concerned Municipal Corporation."
As well as the relevant government decision. Instead of "The powers of the Chairman and other Directors acting on Smart City 807 as set out in section 2 are as follows," read "The powers of the Chairman acting on Smart City SPV are accordingly given as follows." B Instead of the heading "The name and original designation of the officer empowered by this Government to be the Chairman and other Directors of SPV as set out in the table in this paragraph," read "The name and original designation of the officer empowered by this Government to be the Chairman of SPV as set out in this Government Decision."
This government certificate is available on the website of the Government of Maharashtra www.maharashtra.gov.in.