# Page 1
State by State Human Rights Commission
In accordance with the various recommendations received from the Government
Nodal for coordination and action
Appointment of officers.
Government of Maharashtra
the Home Department
GOVERNMENT ORDER No.SHRC-0226 / P.No.12 / POL-14
Second Floor, Main Building, Ministry,
Madame Cama Marg, Martyrdom Rajguru Chowk, Mumbai-400 032.
dated February 4, 2026
Read: - Assistant Public Prosecutor, Writ Branch, Md. Letter from the High Court of Bombay
No. GP / WP / BVS / 1278/2026, D 27.01.2026
the Government Order
The Commission submits various recommendations to the State Government in accordance with the complaints received with the State Human Rights Commission. Action must be taken within the prescribed time frame in accordance with these recommendations. Accordingly
On the recommendations of the State Human Rights Commission pending with the State Government as well as on the recommendations to be received in the future.
The government was considering appointing a nodal officer to conduct the proceedings and coordinate.
2. Deputy Secretary / Joint Secretary, Executive Pole-14, Home Department to coordinate and take action in accordance with the recommendations received from the State Human Rights Commission with various departments of the State Government.
Nodal officer is being appointed. as well as state human rights related to the police department.
Additional Director General of Police to coordinate and take action in accordance with the complaint received from the Commission.
Protection of Civil Rights, State of Maharashtra is being appointed as the Nodal Officer.
3. Also, each of the Ministries / Administrative Departments shall have a State Human Rights Commission attached to their Department.
Appointment of a nodal officer at the divisional level to act on and coordinate the recommendations.
These nodal officers shall do so on the recommendations of the State Human Rights Commission concerned in their department.
Action should be taken and a report should be sent to the State Human Rights Commission. Also, coordinate with the Nodal Officer of the above mentioned Home Department.
The Government Order is available on the Government of Maharashtra website www.maharashtra.gov.in.